[Unknown]: Everything that is happening now has happened before.
[Amit Varma]: A pandemic has struck India, there has been panic, there have been heated debates about
[Amit Varma]: lockdowns, about masks, about vaccines.
[Amit Varma]: The state has been negligent and the state has overreached.
[Amit Varma]: Civil society has risen up in protest, all kinds of rumours about the disease have spread
[Amit Varma]: through the land and the bodies of the dead have piled up.
[Amit Varma]: Except, wait a minute, all this has not only happened before, but it has been much worse.
[Amit Varma]: Between 1817 and 1920, India was struck by three pandemics, which at one point were upon
[Amit Varma]: us at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: Cholera, the plague and influenza killed 40 million people during these 100 years.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, 70 million if you count the 30 million killed by cholera in the years when it was
[Amit Varma]: merely endemic and not a pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: In this time, populations have been devastated, villages wiped out and bodies have piled up
[Amit Varma]: on the streets.
[Amit Varma]: The state has failed and the backlash has changed our history.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, when we are faced with a modern pandemic today, we have forgotten all these lessons
[Amit Varma]: of the past.
[Amit Varma]: But these lessons matter.
[Amit Varma]: To understand these modern times, to deal with the situation in which we find ourselves
[Unknown]: today, we need to learn about India's tryst with pandemics.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Chinmay Tumbe, author of Age of Pandemics, a marvelous new book that
[Amit Varma]: looks at how the Indian subcontinent was ravaged by three pandemics in the century between
[Amit Varma]: 1817 and 1920.
[Amit Varma]: They took more lives than we could imagine, and they shaped our history, our economy,
[Amit Varma]: our politics and our society in profound ways.
[Amit Varma]: Chinmay argues that we need to build a collective memory about this past so that we can avoid
[Amit Varma]: its mistakes and apply its lessons.
[Amit Varma]: Age of Pandemics is a wonderful book of scholarship and analysis, which is not a surprise to me
[Amit Varma]: because Chinmay's previous book, India Moving, a study of migration within India, is in my
[Amit Varma]: opinion one of the most underrated books written about India in the last decade.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode on that book with Chinmay about a year and a half ago, and both that
[Amit Varma]: book and that episode will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: I was delighted to have him once again on the show.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: We often think of ourselves as the masters of the universe, the one species that managed
[Amit Varma]: to tame the earth.
[Amit Varma]: This is nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: If you look at it one way, we are puppets colonized by viruses and bacteria.
[Amit Varma]: We should have had occasion to think about this in 2020.
[Amit Varma]: And we certainly should learn about our past encounters with these mysterious forces.
[Amit Varma]: This episode and Chinmay Tumbe's book is a great way of doing so.
[Amit Varma]: And I have one more suggestion for you.
[Amit Varma]: Hop on over to TheGreatCoursesPlus.com, the sponsors of this episode, and check out the
[Amit Varma]: superb online course called An Introduction to Infectious Diseases by Barry C. Fox.
[Amit Varma]: In 24 fascinating lectures, Fox takes us through our long struggle with infectious diseases.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want to learn something more cheery, chances are that you will find it at The Great
[Amit Varma]: Courses Plus.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic library of online courses from subjects ranging from music, math, cooking,
[Amit Varma]: history, political theory, and much else.
[Amit Varma]: They also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these courses the same way
[Amit Varma]: you listen to podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: And it will cost you nothing.
[Amit Varma]: You get one month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, TheGreatCoursesPlus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: TheGreatCoursesPlus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free access.
[Amit Varma]: Don't procrastinate.
[Amit Varma]: Soak up that knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: Chinmay, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Hi, thanks for having me over.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the last time we spoke, it was about your wonderful book, India Moving, which I
[Amit Varma]: keep recommending to people because I just think it deserves to be more widely read and
[Amit Varma]: more specifically, because it gave me so many insights into my own country.
[Amit Varma]: So many TIL moments.
[Amit Varma]: And that, of course, took sort of a long time in the making.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, this marvelous book that you have now written has happened in the space
[Amit Varma]: of a few months.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me the story of how that came about.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's just, you know, if you told me in Jan that I would write a book by December
[Guest]: on pandemics, you know, I would have laughed.
[Guest]: And in a way, I'm still laughing because it's just a series of events which happened this
[Guest]: year that, you know, ultimately culminated in the book.
[Guest]: But really, the starting point is, of course, that, you know, when I was writing on migration,
[Guest]: even my PhD thesis, you know, I was coming across cholera.
[Guest]: I was coming across plague.
[Guest]: I was coming across influenza.
[Guest]: In fact, even my PhD thesis in 2012, you know, I have this map of population growth rate
[Guest]: in 1911 to 21.
[Guest]: So I clearly knew some of these interesting things about these pandemics because I'd encountered
[Guest]: them before in my research on migration.
[Guest]: But obviously, I'd not done, you know, any, I'd never written a research paper on pandemics.
[Guest]: I'd never really followed up on that initial interest, but I had been scraping through
[Guest]: material wherever I went.
[Guest]: I was at the British Library, you know, many years back doing archival research.
[Guest]: And there's a report on cholera in 1867.
[Guest]: And I kind of got that photocopy.
[Guest]: So I had certain material, and the starting point of this project was really March 11th,
[Guest]: 12th, you know, when the WHO declared it to be a pandemic.
[Guest]: And I, in fact, actually tweeted a bit, you know, on influenza impact on India, and it
[Guest]: got a fair amount of traction.
[Guest]: And one of the things I very quickly realized was, you know, first, there's actually no
[Guest]: book written on influenza in India, which is the greatest demographic disaster ever
[Guest]: in human history, actually.
[Guest]: I mean, 20 million people dying in a few months.
[Guest]: It's never happened before.
[Guest]: So this was, you know, something truly unique.
[Guest]: Somebody had to write it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, as the book starts off with this dialogue with my son, my son actually
[Guest]: asked me, you know, what's this whole thing about pandemics, was it happening in the past?
[Guest]: And I said, yes.
[Guest]: And, you know, he pointed out that influenza was also mentioned in the Tintin.
[Guest]: And I realized that, you know, there's some ways in which the memory is stored.
[Guest]: But overall, you know, unless it's the Black Death of Europe in the 14th century, where
[Guest]: a lot of books have been written, or even the influenza, you know, there's a book by
[Guest]: John Barry on the influenza.
[Guest]: India has one small paragraph in a 500 page book, when half the deaths of that pandemic
[Guest]: happened in India.
[Guest]: So India was really underserved in the current research.
[Guest]: And the fact that in all three pandemics, cholera, plague, influenza in the century
[Guest]: between roughly 1817 and 1920, India was at the epicenter.
[Guest]: And this just really struck me in March that, you know, somebody really has to be writing
[Guest]: about this.
[Guest]: And then, you know, I quickly realized that I was in a unique position to do it, because
[Guest]: I had already assembled this massive mortality statistic database as part of my interest
[Guest]: in economics and history.
[Guest]: And so I started analyzing that database, and I could see the trends, when is mortality
[Guest]: rising, and so on.
[Guest]: So that gave me more confidence that, you know, I could do something on this.
[Guest]: And then coupled with, you know, the fact that a lot of the databases on this are actually
[Guest]: freely available online.
[Guest]: So the Wellcome Trust has, you know, all these pictures and reports freely available online.
[Guest]: So that kind of reduced the transaction costs of doing research.
[Guest]: And typically, you know, a project in history would take many, many years, you sit in archives
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But I realized that at least some of it was easily doable.
[Guest]: So then I think in about April, you know, I kind of said, okay, this is a potential
[Guest]: project.
[Guest]: Of course, it would not be possible without family support.
[Guest]: You know, the amount of hours that put into writing consecutively meant, I mean, I should
[Guest]: really thank my wife and son for giving me that space to just go out there.
[Guest]: I think I would say 100 days of just literally nonstop work, you know, coupled with then,
[Guest]: of course, many more months of post production, and so on.
[Guest]: So it's been a crazy year for everyone.
[Guest]: It's been a crazy year for me.
[Guest]: In the process, also, I lost a friend.
[Guest]: So the book is dedicated to a friend who's a librarian of Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: And it's really thanks to, again, the library of Ahmedabad, you know, that we could actually
[Guest]: get a lot of this material.
[Guest]: So it's a combination of amazing teamwork, which kind of got the book and I really wanted
[Guest]: it out in 2020.
[Guest]: You know, that would have had a nice ring to it.
[Guest]: So finally, the last month, you know, December 2020 is when we could get it out.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what's crazy about this is that your book is by no means a quickie in the
[Amit Varma]: sense is immaculately researched.
[Amit Varma]: And what I do, what I like to do whenever I read nonfiction is I'll go over to the footnotes,
[Amit Varma]: whenever I find something interesting and look at where that's from and look at sort
[Amit Varma]: of the bibliography and you just read a bunch of books while doing this not just books in
[Amit Varma]: terms of historical books, books on previous epidemics slash pandemics.
[Amit Varma]: But even you know, you've quoted throughout your book from different novels and literary
[Amit Varma]: works and all of that very aptly.
[Amit Varma]: So I simply have to then ask you about, you know, what are your processes of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: management, for example, like how many books if I may ask, did you read during this period?
[Amit Varma]: How many books do you normally read?
[Amit Varma]: How many did you read during this period?
[Amit Varma]: And what are your sort of methods or hacks for compressing this kind of data gathering
[Amit Varma]: and knowledge gathering?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, all of that?
[Guest]: Great question.
[Guest]: There's no doubt I've read more books in 2020 than any year of my life.
[Guest]: And I love to read, you know, so this is definitely a year of massive, massive amount of reading,
[Guest]: not just the number of books, but also research articles, papers and so on.
[Guest]: Now, well, you know, the book has like 800 footnotes, and it cites over 400 studies.
[Guest]: But I should say that, you know, does that mean I have read each and every book cover
[Guest]: to cover?
[Guest]: That's impossible.
[Guest]: That's impossible for anybody to read, say 300 books, you know, that's just impossible.
[Guest]: So a lot of books, of course, I quickly realized what is the really important part of it.
[Guest]: And really, you know, get that into the book.
[Guest]: So for example, there's a great book called everyday technologies, which is about really
[Guest]: technology history of India.
[Guest]: But there's this amazing part on plague, where there's a reference in this book about how
[Guest]: the tailors of Singer manufacturing company, you know, which is a multinational based in
[Guest]: India, they had this particular issue of tailors dying because of the plague in late 19th century.
[Guest]: And I just got that reference.
[Guest]: Now, it just so happens that I've read this book in the past.
[Guest]: But there are many books in which very quickly, as a researcher, you know, you can go through
[Guest]: the index, you're looking for plague, cholera, influenza, these are the three pandemics.
[Guest]: And if you're not, if you get it, you're lucky, right.
[Guest]: So I would also say I've gone through many more books which are not cited, just to find
[Guest]: out if they mentioned plague, cholera, or influenza.
[Guest]: But in the process, I had to read certain quote, the first book, let me tell you the
[Guest]: process.
[Guest]: The first book I read, was this Cambridge encyclopedia of human diseases, right, because
[Guest]: I had to tell myself, look, I don't know anything about medical science.
[Guest]: I'm not a scientist.
[Guest]: I'm not a biologist.
[Guest]: And I'm looking at this literally from a trained economist who's getting into history.
[Guest]: That's, you know, that's my background.
[Guest]: So I said have to be at least, I should not get the science drastically wrong, you know,
[Guest]: so I had to read it.
[Guest]: So this is a 1000 page book, you know, which came out in 1993, obviously, there's no updates
[Guest]: in that.
[Guest]: But this is supposed to be the canonical book on medical history.
[Guest]: And so those 1000 pages gave me like this nice quick summary of all the major diseases
[Guest]: of the world, major medical schools.
[Guest]: So that was the starting point.
[Guest]: And then some of the canonical books on cholera, canonical books on plague, and unfortunately
[Guest]: influenza, literally nothing has been written on India, you know, so there's really no book
[Guest]: on India.
[Guest]: Similarly, with plague and cholera, you know, David Arnold has a book.
[Guest]: So that was useful to start with.
[Guest]: And then he's done wonderful work, even in the recent days.
[Guest]: So then slowly after that, of course, for a writer, you want to tie up the basic academic
[Guest]: blocks with literary references with, you know, variety of things, newspaper archives,
[Guest]: which are easily accessible, at least from our library.
[Guest]: But there are a lot of chance discoveries.
[Guest]: So I was, you know, literally one finding thinking, you know, they're not enough first
[Guest]: person references in what I'm doing right now.
[Guest]: It's becoming a drab sort of statistical kind of analysis.
[Guest]: And I was just looking at my bookshelf.
[Guest]: And there it was, you know, Smriti Chitre, which is this Marathi autobiography by Lakshmi
[Guest]: by Tilak, written in the 1930s, and translated in English just a few years back by Shanta
[Guest]: Gokhale.
[Guest]: And there it was, there was a first person reference about plague.
[Guest]: And unknown even to Shanta Gokhale, who translated the book, the disease Manmodi was nothing
[Guest]: but this great influenza epidemic of 1918.
[Guest]: And I just, it was a eureka moment that, you know, I said, she's talking about influenza
[Guest]: 1918, which is the greatest disaster in a first person account, because that family
[Guest]: went through that.
[Guest]: So I got these amazing references purely out of chance.
[Guest]: So I think the writer's thing is then about putting these things in a nice sort of a story.
[Guest]: But the big story is very clear.
[Guest]: This was a period where we are told in India, is the rise and fall of British rule.
[Guest]: And yet what I was finding is in the day to day lives of people, I mean, they were less
[Guest]: scared of the British than infectious disease, because it's like today, you know, we have
[Guest]: concerns with the politics and so on.
[Guest]: But the primary concern over here is trying not to get this disease.
[Guest]: And that's pretty much how Indians were looking at this.
[Guest]: And the numbers were stark, you know, we're saying about 70 million people globally died
[Guest]: of these three pandemics, 40 million in India alone.
[Guest]: These are numbers greater than the wars fought in this period.
[Guest]: More people died in India in influenza than all of the people who died on the battlefields
[Guest]: of World War One.
[Guest]: So putting all that together, you know, I thought I had a fair amount of kind of work
[Guest]: cut ahead for me.
[Guest]: But luckily, access to resources was relatively easy, because I live on a university campus.
[Guest]: So that's, I think, I think there are various things that cut down transaction costs of
[Guest]: doing research.
[Guest]: As I said, amazing library team, they got me really rare, even manuscripts from, you
[Guest]: know, just talking with other libraries, they have this fantastic interlibrary ties.
[Guest]: So clearly, if you're not in a university setting, obviously, I think the transaction
[Guest]: costs are much, much higher, but not a chance encounter.
[Guest]: You know, I was in South Park Street Cemetery in Calcutta, which is a burial ground, literally
[Guest]: few days before the lockdown, a few more days, and I'll be stuck in Calcutta, and this book
[Guest]: will probably never happen.
[Guest]: You know, it's just so happened that came back to Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: But South Park Street Cemetery, my economist training, you know, I saw this book at the
[Guest]: counter.
[Guest]: And that was the registry of all the deaths out there.
[Guest]: Now, at that point, I didn't know I was going to write a book on pandemics, but I picked
[Guest]: up that book, I bought it, and I got it to a spreadsheet.
[Guest]: This is what all economists will do, you know, put it in a spreadsheet.
[Guest]: And there it was, because I wanted some evidence that 1817, a lot of people said this was an
[Guest]: important year, and the book starts on this year.
[Guest]: You know, how do you show that 1817 is, there were a lot of deaths in 1817.
[Guest]: One is by saying, people said that something happened in that year.
[Guest]: But ideally, you would like to see like a trend line, you'd want to have pre 1817 data,
[Guest]: and then show that 1817 things jump up.
[Guest]: And there it was, I got this digitized.
[Guest]: And this is the burial grounds in Calcutta where cholera struck mid time.
[Guest]: And it's a flat line before 1817.
[Guest]: And it spikes up.
[Guest]: So the number of burials recorded in South Park Street Cemetery conforms to what people
[Guest]: are saying then, you know, about which years cholera struck very, very nicely, not just
[Guest]: for 1817.
[Guest]: But you know, for the next 50 years.
[Guest]: So again, a chance encounter, literally a walk through that cemetery, picking up a book,
[Amit Varma]: and then that becomes a useful source.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll kind of stick on the subject for just a moment before we get to the book.
[Amit Varma]: Once you're sort of, you're doing all of this reading, how do you organize the knowledge
[Amit Varma]: that you're taking from there?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there a special software that you use many of these, I'm guessing, especially
[Amit Varma]: if you're getting them from the library, they'll be like physical books?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a software?
[Amit Varma]: How do you organize all of this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do you manage all of that?
[Guest]: Yeah, I would say I'm quite old fashioned that way.
[Guest]: I know they are, you know, specialized software.
[Guest]: I'm sure I can do research more efficiently than what I'm doing right now.
[Guest]: I'm old fashioned in the sense I use a spreadsheet.
[Guest]: So I, you know, I put all my thoughts in a spreadsheet.
[Guest]: And you know, I have lines put in bold, which I don't want to miss over.
[Guest]: And what I can miss, you know, it's not in bold.
[Guest]: But what I definitely do is, you know, like in this project, kind of try to collect all
[Guest]: the basic literature.
[Guest]: So what I made a list of about 500 studies, which I said I have to go through, even if
[Guest]: I don't read each of them cover to cover, I should be aware of what they're saying.
[Guest]: And so I put those 500 studies, you know, worksheet.
[Guest]: So it's a reference sheet, and that's going to be, by the way, next week, it's, there's
[Guest]: a supplement to this book, which is going to go online, it's a working paper.
[Guest]: And so that will have a list of, you know, all the studies.
[Guest]: So I did, I made that first.
[Guest]: And so I knew what, you know, I was working within.
[Guest]: And then, you know, after that, the spreadsheet kind of helps sort your ideas, kind of saying,
[Guest]: okay, this is the flow.
[Guest]: It was all nebulous.
[Guest]: You know, when I started in March, I really didn't know what is, I all I knew is that
[Guest]: there can be three chapters, core chapters of the book, which is going to clear up like
[Guest]: an influenza, and then maybe an introductory chapter and a concluding chapter kind of reflecting
[Guest]: on COVID-19.
[Guest]: But then beyond that, you know, how do you write a colera, this colera is almost a hundred
[Guest]: year pandemic.
[Guest]: So it's really pick and choose.
[Guest]: You can't talk about each and every year, you can't talk about each and every country.
[Guest]: So you really have to select.
[Guest]: And so my process of selection then is, like in the book on migration is demographic, that
[Guest]: is, where did it have the largest impact?
[Guest]: So obviously India had the largest impact and India gets covered the most, but in cholera,
[Guest]: I devote some time to Egypt, you know, because Egypt had the largest, like 10% of its population
[Guest]: was wiped out.
[Guest]: So as a percentage of population, Egypt was the most affected.
[Guest]: So you know, it affected US, it affected Mexico.
[Guest]: So I try to then cover those regions which are most affected.
[Guest]: And I think that's the pattern in all the chapters, that is the regions most affected
[Guest]: by the pandemics.
[Guest]: So if you talk of plague, not just Bombay, no, most of plague literature in Bombay on
[Guest]: India is Bombay city.
[Guest]: And this book, probably the first time, you know, it's really expanding that thing because
[Guest]: Bombay city was a really small part of India's plague encounter.
[Guest]: The bulk of it was the Bombay presidency, Punjab, UP, outside Bombay, the bulk of it
[Guest]: was rural India.
[Guest]: You know, people think of plague as being a Bombay incident, the bulk of it was actually
[Guest]: rural India.
[Guest]: So that's the sort of sorting process to try and get the big picture, where is it actually
[Guest]: affected, and then trying to get literature which has looked at that.
[Guest]: And where it's not been written, then to actually dig up sources, go to newspaper archives and
[Guest]: a variety of other things to kind of hold reports, vaccination records and a variety
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: And along the way, discover a lot, you know, so some of it has been done by medical historians.
[Guest]: So I looked at that literature very closely.
[Guest]: But beyond that, you know, to your question about efficient management of information,
[Guest]: I don't think I'm terribly efficient.
[Guest]: But there is some method, I think, in this, you know, research process.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to the book now.
[Amit Varma]: And before we start talking about pandemics per se, there was a broader question, which
[Amit Varma]: I thought I should ask at the start, because it really intrigued me and struck me, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how we normalize all the progress that we make in terms of technology or standards
[Amit Varma]: of living or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I was, you know, struck by when you wrote the following words about mass mortality,
[Amit Varma]: where you wrote, quote, once upon a time, we barely lived before we died, we would celebrate
[Amit Varma]: on average only 25 birthdays in our lifetimes.
[Amit Varma]: And we rarely grew old enough to see our grandchildren.
[Amit Varma]: Mass mortality through war, famine, natural disasters, and epidemics was a way of life.
[Amit Varma]: We began to live longer only when we fought fewer wars, understood how to fight famines,
[Amit Varma]: grew resilient to natural disasters, and learned how to control the spread of disease, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And at different points in the book, when you talk about, you know, specific pandemics
[Amit Varma]: or even diseases, we see how you could not take life for granted.
[Amit Varma]: For example, at one point, when you're writing about smallpox, you write, quote, there's
[Amit Varma]: an old saying in India common in the 19th century, that children were not counted as
[Amit Varma]: permanent members of the family until they had encountered smallpox once and survived,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, later, when you're sort of talking about another pandemic, you quote
[Amit Varma]: David Gilmore in the British in India, saying, quote, one visitor reported that he had twice
[Amit Varma]: lunched with men whose burials he had been invited to attend before supper the same day,
[Amit Varma]: when an epidemic arrived at a station, people began measuring their lives in ours.
[Amit Varma]: They went to the club each evening apprehensive to know who was missing from the night before.
[Amit Varma]: Death was so familiar to the British in India, so quick and so frequent that they hardly
[Amit Varma]: seemed room for prolonged grief.
[Amit Varma]: If an officer died on campaign, his belongings were auctioned as soon as the funeral was
[Amit Varma]: over.
[Amit Varma]: Horses, clothes, revolver, even his cooking pot and his water bottle, stop quote, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and it kind of struck me that back in the day and pandemics weren't obviously the
[Amit Varma]: only threat to life.
[Amit Varma]: It was almost a fact of life that when you are young itself, your friends are going to
[Amit Varma]: start dying on you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you have such huge amounts of people and we are possibly one of the few generations,
[Amit Varma]: you know, over the last few decades that we don't have to kind of deal with this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the mortality rate, the average lifespan used to be 25 a few decades ago,
[Amit Varma]: and now it's 70 and we can take certain things for granted.
[Amit Varma]: So in your reading of history, I mean, it seems to me that this then hangs over everything.
[Amit Varma]: It hangs over everything that people do, the way they live their lives, the way they behave.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what are your sort of thoughts on this as a historian kind of coming across
[Amit Varma]: this?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, this layer of sort of likely mortality where, you know, you can't take
[Amit Varma]: long life for granted as we all do, that simply isn't there for most of human history.
[Guest]: You know, before 1920, I mean, this book ends in 1920, because that's the transition point
[Guest]: when you look at India's death data, India's death rate starts falling only after 1920.
[Guest]: But before 1920 in India, and of course, before certain periods, say 1850s in Britain and
[Guest]: so on, you know, death rates, we're talking of something like 50 per 1000, 5% of the population
[Guest]: dying every year.
[Guest]: Now, those are very, very high numbers.
[Guest]: That's about 10 times higher than what we are living with today, right?
[Guest]: And the worst part of that death rate is infant mortality, right?
[Guest]: So it's also the fact that most people who died actually in a year were actually small
[Guest]: kids, which is also a great achievement of the last 100 years of getting you know, those
[Guest]: rates down.
[Guest]: So for example, when I walked around this South Park Street Cemetery in Calcutta, you
[Guest]: see these tombs, right?
[Guest]: And when you walk past them, you think, okay, these are the guys who've died.
[Guest]: And when you look at the data, 20% of those deaths were actually kids.
[Guest]: So they're actually buried out there.
[Guest]: But you don't really think when you walk in a cemetery of kids who died in such large
[Guest]: numbers.
[Guest]: And that's pretty much human history.
[Guest]: You know, there are theories that say, you know, you know, there's some bad periods and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: But all the evidence is pointing out that there's no real epoch in human history where
[Guest]: people live for 100 years and so on.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, you have few individuals, you know, who live for a long time, like in
[Guest]: the age of pandemics, the two people who, you know, live for nearly 100 years coinciding
[Guest]: with the period I'm mentioning is Dada Bhai Naoroji, you know, Dinyar Patel has a nice
[Guest]: book on this.
[Guest]: But he survives the entire age of pandemics, you know, it's perfectly his life is just
[Guest]: about that.
[Guest]: He dies in a year or two before influenza, you know.
[Guest]: So but almost 90 plus years in that period.
[Guest]: The other one is Florence Nightingale.
[Guest]: She also lives for almost 100 years.
[Guest]: So these are outliers.
[Guest]: But the average person, you know, cannot expect to live more than 25 years in India.
[Guest]: So there's even this concept of a grandparent, you know, obviously, people are marrying young,
[Guest]: so you're becoming potentially grandparents at the age of 40 or 50.
[Guest]: But you don't live that long.
[Guest]: So it's this whole notion that, you know, today we can see our grandparents and so on.
[Guest]: It's a very modern day concept.
[Guest]: Because mortality was so high.
[Guest]: And why was it so high?
[Guest]: Of course, like I mentioned, you know, there's war, there are these other things, but fundamentally
[Guest]: epidemics.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And so the big killers of history is Malaria.
[Guest]: Okay, so in India, at least, you know, more people have died from malaria than probably
[Guest]: anything else.
[Guest]: But then you had these chance epidemics like cholera, or, you know, plague and influenza,
[Guest]: which we call as pandemics.
[Guest]: But then variety of other things, you know, diarrhea, then tuberculosis, you know, a big
[Guest]: killer.
[Guest]: And ultimately, all of this is linked with nutrition, you know, the healthier we are,
[Guest]: even if there was plague, you could survive it, to a certain extent.
[Guest]: So at the base of mortality is how well are you eating food as simple as that.
[Guest]: And in a world where you had famines, where your whole economy was completely rain fed
[Guest]: or, you know, rain dependent, especially in India, a slight sort of, you know, bad rainfall
[Guest]: meant people would start starving.
[Guest]: And even if you're not going to die out of complete starvation, the disease would act
[Guest]: upon under nutrition.
[Guest]: And that has huge salience today, you know, because we're saying that, you know, this
[Guest]: is the year where the average Indian has actually got poorer nutrition, even the latest data
[Guest]: suggests kind of, you know, not so great.
[Guest]: What it means is that if you don't get your basic nutrition levels up, there's always
[Guest]: going to be a, you know, this impact of infectious disease is going to be that much more.
[Guest]: And that is why it was so, so stark, you know, before 1920.
[Guest]: So after 1920, it improved precisely because nutrition kind of improved a little bit, but
[Guest]: also because the better control of, you know, certain diseases, which, and that's, I would
[Guest]: say, you know, the great achievement of the last hundred years is precisely this, what
[Guest]: Angus Deaton calls the great escape, you know, this rise in well-being, really life expectancy,
[Guest]: the fact that people can live, you know, for almost 70 years now in India, the life expectancy
[Guest]: at birth compared to it being 25 and falling, you know, for some years in the early 20th
[Guest]: century is the remarkable achievement of modern science.
[Amit Varma]: And is it fair to say that, you know, the 19th century in a sense was the period that
[Amit Varma]: you write off, in fact, specifically 1817 to 1920, almost as such is like, if you were
[Amit Varma]: pandemics personified, you would think that this is an optimal time for you to exist.
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, you suddenly have globalization and travel everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So all of these things can spread.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, modern medicine hasn't yet caught up with all of this.
[Amit Varma]: And it is in that sweet spot where these things they're spreading faster than ever.
[Amit Varma]: But science hasn't figured out what is causing them, leave alone how to cure them.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Like think about the railways, you know, so much fascination with the railways.
[Guest]: And that obviously, any transport, I mean, one link between my first book and the second
[Guest]: book is that, you know, you cannot have a pandemic without some migration.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the link between pandemics and migration.
[Guest]: And there's no doubt that obviously, some transport would have, you know, carried out,
[Guest]: you know, these infectious diseases, though, having said that, even some of these diseases
[Guest]: also travel just by, you know, when people are walking.
[Guest]: So it's not that you had to have modern transport to have a pandemic in the first place.
[Guest]: But let's take railways, you know, people are fascinated by the railways.
[Guest]: But at the same time, over time, as these diseases intensified, there was no doubt that,
[Guest]: you know, there was some sort of negative fallout because of the railways in spreading
[Guest]: diseases.
[Guest]: So you're absolutely right, this globalization, all the things which are celebrated in the
[Guest]: 19th century, right?
[Guest]: I mean, this is the birth of the modern world.
[Guest]: One of the reasons this book, you know, I mentioned this in the first chapter, you have
[Guest]: on the one hand, say, Christopher Billy's The Birth of the Modern World, this is a grand
[Guest]: project of, you know, the rise of the modern world between 1789, the French Revolution
[Guest]: and 1914, First World War, then you have the Eric Hobsbawm series, you know, Age of Empire,
[Guest]: Age of Capital, and, you know, all these grandstanding books.
[Guest]: And yet both these series don't or because they're Eurocentric, you know, most of that
[Guest]: stuff is comes from a European view, epidemics and pandemics are really not part of that
[Guest]: story.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that's one of the things, if you wrote European history of the 14th century, you
[Guest]: would have to talk about the plague, the Black Death.
[Guest]: And so this is where actually this book comes in, because it's pitched at this idea that
[Guest]: this is an age of pandemics, pandemics affect, of course, most parts of the world, but it
[Guest]: had a disproportionate impact on Asia, and within Asia, disproportionate impact on India.
[Guest]: And that is why this overall century of progress seen from the Western prism, you know, America
[Guest]: is surging ahead.
[Guest]: You know, they go from a population of something like five to 10 million to 100 million by
[Guest]: the end of this time period.
[Guest]: Europe is surging ahead.
[Guest]: And typically the Indian views, you know, colonialism kind of dented India's prospects
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Actually, what this book is arguing is that pandemics was also a constraining factor.
[Guest]: The fact that we could not do business in the first place as much as what the West could
[Guest]: do was because we had these pandemics in the first place.
[Guest]: It's actually right, you know, this is an interesting period of history, because on
[Guest]: the one hand, there's this dramatic revolution, what we call is the first and second Industrial
[Guest]: Revolution.
[Guest]: And yet, on the other hand, you have this, you know, massive spread of diseases.
[Guest]: And the West is continuously concerned, you know, when you see what they're talking about
[Guest]: cholera plague, the memory of them is the Black Death, you know, it's a memory which
[Guest]: stays on for five centuries or six centuries.
[Guest]: And they don't want that to happen, because the Black Death, you know, wiped out one third
[Guest]: of Europe by most estimates, which is a huge percentage, you know, one third of a big region
[Guest]: as Europe dying out.
[Guest]: And so why the Black Death had registered in the European consciousness, somehow this
[Guest]: period 1817 to 1920, it's kind of completely escaped memory, you know, it's not really
[Guest]: even recorded well in our history.
[Guest]: And that's one of the reasons why the book was written.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one of the things that struck me, and I had no idea that, you know, that it
[Amit Varma]: would be the case to this extent, that pandemics actually shaped our history, like, as we'll
[Amit Varma]: go on to discuss in detail, each of the three pandemics that you talked about, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: changed economics and society, but also had a massive impact on politics, especially the
[Amit Varma]: plague, you know, we keep reading about the battle between the extremists and the moderates
[Amit Varma]: in the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: But it was, you know, the plague had a big part in that coming about, which was quite
[Amit Varma]: surprising to me.
[Amit Varma]: And you also kind of point out how during this period, you know, which is sometimes
[Amit Varma]: called the Great Divergence, because this is where Asia's share of world GDP falls from
[Amit Varma]: like 50% to 20%.
[Amit Varma]: And what you point out is that during this time, mainly because of these pandemics, Asia's
[Amit Varma]: population, share of the world population also fell from 65 to 50, which obviously,
[Amit Varma]: you know, had a role in that fall in GDP as well, and is a major part and yet you're right,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whatever histories I have read of these times in these periods, and especially
[Amit Varma]: of India, you know, historians will hardly mention all of this.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like in our everyday lives, we kind of take disease for granted, like I just
[Amit Varma]: recorded an episode yesterday, which will actually release after yours, in which my
[Amit Varma]: guest pointed out that every day America is losing as many people to COVID-19 as they
[Amit Varma]: lost during 9-11.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and yet one is so incredibly visible, and the other is, you know, it gets normalized
[Amit Varma]: very fast.
[Amit Varma]: And it is not one big event, which makes for great television.
[Amit Varma]: So it kind of just gets lost.
[Amit Varma]: You know, early in the book, you point out about, you know, your two core arguments during
[Amit Varma]: the book, and you've actually elaborated on them in the last few minutes.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that, you know, you want to place these pandemics in the global historiography,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it, for a layperson like me, you know, what do you mean by global historiography?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is what you're saying that, you know, the historical narratives that have emerged
[Amit Varma]: of the grand themes that shape society have to perforce to speak about these pandemics?
[Guest]: Is that what you mean?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So global historiography is used by historians, it's another way of saying the narrative,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So for example, what is the, you know, what is the most important thing that we remember
[Guest]: of say, the 1700s of India, right?
[Guest]: And it's about this tussle between the Mughals and this disintegration.
[Guest]: So that's the historiography, Mughal decline, East India Company ascent, and the Marathas.
[Guest]: This is probably the defining historiography of this period.
[Guest]: Now, if somebody comes and tells you that, look, this is happening, yes, but there's
[Guest]: something else.
[Guest]: There were actually, hypothetically, five major earthquakes, which hit the 1700s, which
[Guest]: actually nobody's talked about right now.
[Guest]: And it's actually those earthquakes, which tilted the balance of power between these
[Guest]: three things.
[Guest]: You know, that's the kind of stuff I think, which what this book is doing, that is, there
[Guest]: is certain things which actually happened, you know, I'm not inventing these diseases,
[Guest]: they happen, you know, all these people died, unfortunately, in large numbers.
[Guest]: Yet the dominant narrative of the 19th century, right, in the West is one of ascendancy, right?
[Guest]: It is one of empire building.
[Guest]: So imperialism, as one is in nationalism, another one, right, globalization.
[Guest]: This is a period, especially from the 1850s onwards, massive trade to GDP ratios start
[Guest]: rising.
[Guest]: We're at city building, urbanization, right?
[Guest]: So these are, this is the historiography.
[Guest]: So when we talk of global history, of course, this is not happening all around the world,
[Guest]: but this is happening in the West, right?
[Guest]: And I would say that the major historiography of the 19th century is imperialism, right?
[Guest]: Because this is a time when empires really grow, and by the late 19th century, even Africa
[Guest]: is almost completely colonized after this, you know, Berlin conference and so on.
[Guest]: So in this whole value, if you have to look at especially India, let's start with India,
[Guest]: the historiography is one of British ascendancy, right?
[Guest]: So 19th century as a world of British ascendancy.
[Guest]: And what I'm arguing is actually that the sort of an important event running through
[Guest]: this thing is pandemics.
[Guest]: Now it is true that they did not actually use the word pandemics in the 19th century.
[Guest]: The word pandemic out of these three diseases really applies to influenza.
[Guest]: So if you see the Indian government reports, the pandemic word comes for influenza, play
[Guest]: people are using it, but not so much.
[Guest]: So the operative word is epidemics, right?
[Guest]: But one way of actually seeing the 19th century, the historiography is actually that people
[Guest]: are really scared.
[Guest]: Of course, they're scared of each other, fighting wars and so on, but they're really scared
[Guest]: of diseases.
[Guest]: And new diseases, which they have no clue about.
[Guest]: So one way of saying is, you know, and why this particular period, you know, I'm trying
[Guest]: to make this argument in this book, you can say death rates were always high before 1920.
[Guest]: One of the things I'm pointing out is that actually death rates started increasing.
[Guest]: Even from those high death rates, you know, they started actually increasing towards the
[Guest]: late 19th century.
[Guest]: And that, you know, a lot of political events actually were shaped.
[Guest]: Much of the book also talks about, you know, important political events, which was shaped
[Guest]: by these pandemics itself.
[Guest]: So what I want to do in this book is to give a more central role for pandemics in global
[Guest]: history.
[Guest]: It's true that they did not, you know, these pandemics did not kill too many people in
[Guest]: Europe, in North America, but it killed a lot of people in Asia, and it killed a lot
[Guest]: of people in India.
[Guest]: So there is really, I mean, even if you think of World War One, you know, it had such few
[Guest]: casualties outside of Europe, yet we called it, we call it World War One.
[Guest]: You know, there's this word attached to it called world.
[Guest]: So that's something similar to what I want to do out here, that the fear of this pandemic
[Guest]: was there throughout the world.
[Guest]: The Americans were concerned about what they call as Indian cholera, just as today they
[Guest]: call it the Chinese virus, you know.
[Guest]: And so around the world, India was also not known just for, you know, the British rule,
[Guest]: but as a source of diseases, like how we look at China today.
[Guest]: And so this kind of also looks at global history in new light, that is different parts of the
[Guest]: world, so it also impacted geopolitics, that is, you know, how countries were perceiving
[Guest]: each other.
[Guest]: One part of that story was actually epidemics.
[Guest]: So that's what I mean by historiography.
[Guest]: What is the narrative?
[Guest]: And the standard narrative right now is imperialism, nationalism, globalization.
[Guest]: And what I want to argue is that, you know, epidemics was also there in this, in this
[Guest]: picture.
[Guest]: And especially these three pandemics of cholera, plague and influenza, which definitely affected
[Guest]: India a lot.
[Guest]: I do have, you know, my subtitle of the book has the word world in it, yet any reader who,
[Guest]: you know, reads this book is going to realize that most of this book is about India.
[Guest]: But I do that because most of the deaths were in India.
[Guest]: But it's a fact that it did touch upon many parts of the world, from Russia, from Egypt,
[Guest]: to even Brazil, where, you know, some part of the population was wiped out.
[Guest]: And you know, there's a book, Love in the Time of Cholera, you know, Marquez would not
[Guest]: have written that book if cholera was not such a defining period.
[Guest]: And cholera emerged from India in at least some, you know, some form or the other.
[Guest]: So that's the whole idea of putting pandemics in 19th and early 20th century, what historians
[Guest]: call historiography.
[Amit Varma]: And your other core focus, which you talk about is also the building of collective memory,
[Amit Varma]: as you put it in the sense that you argued that, you know, quote, the age of pandemics
[Amit Varma]: has been forgotten in the country most affected by it, India, and there is value in remembering
[Amit Varma]: it as a major event, just as the Black Death plague pandemic of the 14th century is registered
[Amit Varma]: in European consciousness to this day.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, at another point where you're talking about the historical context of such
[Amit Varma]: epidemics, you speak about how in the Arthashastra, you know, Kautilya writes about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the four great threats to life, which are war, natural disasters, famines and epidemics.
[Amit Varma]: And yet epidemics is like fourth in his list of priority, and it's not taken so seriously.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that is?
[Amit Varma]: Why do we forget, you know, 20 million people dying?
[Amit Varma]: And that too, when it was a, you know, 6.4% of India's population, then, as you point
[Amit Varma]: out, is a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, why do we tend to forget?
[Amit Varma]: Is it because they are individual lives and individual stories, and there's like, no kind
[Amit Varma]: of mass representation or a grand narrative of that sort?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, you know, how is memory, how is any memory preserved?
[Guest]: One, storytelling.
[Guest]: I mean, why is it that we, you know, still narrate the Mahabharata and Ramayana from
[Guest]: generation to generation, that memory is kept alive.
[Guest]: Nobody's telling us, you know, narratives of plague and cholera as bedtime stories any
[Guest]: longer.
[Guest]: One is, of course, that it's negative.
[Guest]: It's about death.
[Guest]: So you want to forget it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that's one attribute of why we don't want to hold on to negative memories and you want
[Guest]: to hold on to more such positive memories.
[Guest]: Two, there is no identifiable enemy, as with, say, a war, right?
[Guest]: So in a war, or like, you know, look at influenza, you know, 19, April 1919, you had the Jallianwala
[Guest]: Bagh tragedy.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: That has been memorialized.
[Guest]: You know, there's, there's a whole thing attached with it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, if you go there today, there's a particular, you know, monument, you have these hundred
[Guest]: year anniversary events.
[Guest]: Nobody was, you know, commemorating hundred years of influenza, which killed, you know,
[Guest]: 20 million Indians.
[Guest]: But for Jallianwala Bagh tragedy, it killed a few hundred Indians.
[Guest]: But the, the, the memory is so much stronger.
[Guest]: Why there's a clear enemy.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: It was the British in that case, with influenza, you know, H1N1A is not really an enemy the
[Guest]: public is going to sort of take.
[Guest]: So clearly identifiable enemies.
[Guest]: I'd also point out, you know, compared to wars or natural disasters, right, which affect
[Guest]: both capital and labor, that is, it not only kills people, it kills the actual building
[Guest]: and, you know, it, it destroys buildings, it destroys monuments.
[Guest]: So in historical recording as well, people noted down, you know, the destruction of Rome,
[Guest]: the destruction of Delhi, for example.
[Guest]: Now with an epidemic, you know, the city, the physical stock of the city doesn't fall.
[Guest]: It's just people kind of withering away in that.
[Guest]: It could be the case that the epidemic sparks a revolution, then there's mayhem in that,
[Guest]: but otherwise a pure epidemic just takes labor.
[Guest]: It doesn't affect capital.
[Guest]: And that means in historical recording, it's not glamorous enough.
[Guest]: It's not spectacular.
[Guest]: And so that's why historians often have failed to actually systematically document these
[Guest]: epidemics.
[Guest]: So I think that's one of the reasons, inadequate memorialization.
[Guest]: So I pointed out, like, if you want to know something about plague and so on, if you look
[Guest]: closely enough, there might be some markers like the Hafkin Institute in Bombay, you know,
[Guest]: is one memory because Hafkin was this great scientist who was associated with both cholera
[Guest]: and plague in India.
[Guest]: So there's an institute in his honor, but nobody would associate Hafkin with pandemics
[Guest]: and so on today.
[Guest]: There's a statue in South Bombay of, you know, Vigas, who was the first guy who spotted plague
[Guest]: in Bombay.
[Guest]: There's a statue, you know, there's a statue, but nobody's really thinking of that statue
[Guest]: outside of metro cinema as, you know, a memory of the plague back then.
[Guest]: And so one of the things that might be, you know, useful is, you know, it's an open question
[Guest]: whether we need to have museums on these epidemics or something like that, but definitely it
[Guest]: has to be taught.
[Guest]: You know, I feel it has to be taught in our history curriculums in the sense and especially
[Unknown]: in medical schools.
[Guest]: You know, and what I'm really amazed is that this is not being taught in medical schools.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, okay.
[Guest]: You know, there's a straw man argument that, you know, just because, you know, we say that,
[Guest]: you know, this is not taught to us in history.
[Guest]: I have my sympathies with people who write history textbooks because simply put, we cannot
[Guest]: put everything in the textbook.
[Guest]: You know, some things have to be left out.
[Guest]: So, okay.
[Guest]: You don't want to put this history in classical textbooks, that's fine.
[Guest]: But medical students, they have to be exposed to this idea that India went through this
[Guest]: massive, you know, episode once.
[Guest]: And it should definitely inspire them to not only research the past, but also use some
[Guest]: of those lessons, you know, for today.
[Guest]: So memory is important.
[Guest]: And that's what the book is trying to push, that we need to build collective memory, not
[Guest]: only of our past, you know, major pandemics, and that can happen in multiple ways.
[Guest]: For example, so many health officials in the last 40 years, you know, have devoted their
[Guest]: lives to eradicating polio, for example, before that smallpox.
[Guest]: They should write their autobiographies, or they should write their memoirs, you know,
[Guest]: because that would be of tremendous, you know, use for public health people going forward
[Guest]: as to how did we manage to eradicate polio, that was such a great success story.
[Guest]: So there need to be books written on that, for example.
[Guest]: So if not movies, and that's expecting too much, you know, or even like a day of the
[Guest]: year to remember, you know, contributions of nurses, doctors, police people, mortuary
[Guest]: workers and so on.
[Guest]: I think just basic introduction of some of these themes in curricula will help, you know,
[Guest]: that's the grand hope of this book, that some of this gets picked up in history textbooks,
[Guest]: if not the main cluster in history textbook, you know, at least medical school textbooks,
[Guest]: or at least be taught as a course in medical schools, that this is, you know, an important
[Guest]: aspect of this.
[Guest]: Because I can tell you, in Europe, kids grow up knowing what is the Black Death.
[Guest]: Black Death is now an interesting event in general history, right?
[Guest]: And I think this period demands such attention.
[Guest]: Because for us, this period is just about British rule, you know, and I think there's
[Guest]: something something beyond British rule, which, in fact, took many more lives than British
[Guest]: rule themselves.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, one of the things that kind of, again, struck me about your book
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, what we sort of have a vague idea of how the Black Death and how
[Amit Varma]: plagues shaped, you know, European history, in a sense, you know, the three pandemics
[Amit Varma]: of these hundred years, it's a similar thing to India, for example, in Europe, you talk
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, the Black Death, court is said to have had consequences that are open
[Amit Varma]: to debate, such as laying the foundation for the rise of Europe, the Renaissance movement,
[Amit Varma]: the Protestant Reformation, and even accelerating anti semitism, stop court.
[Amit Varma]: And later, you talk about all the different consequences at that time, like inequality,
[Amit Varma]: like in northern Europe, more women went into the workforce.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, anti semitism continued rising because Jews were blamed for the pandemic
[Amit Varma]: in court, Aragon, Provence, Catalonia, Switzerland, Rhineland, and southern Germany.
[Amit Varma]: So you have these major sort of trends happening and the pandemic played a part in that.
[Amit Varma]: Was it kind of a surprise to you to realize the extent of the role that pandemic played
[Amit Varma]: in history?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, at one point in your book, you write about how while researching your
[Amit Varma]: previous book, you put together this map, tell me a little bit about that map.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you point to it as a sort of a moment of revelation.
[Amit Varma]: Was there kind of more to it than that?
[Amit Varma]: And did some of it perhaps come after you had started work on the book?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, you know, that map that you're referring to, it's a simple district level map of India,
[Guest]: which shows population growth rates between 1911 and 1921.
[Guest]: So on this particular map, when I, you know, drew this population growth rate map, it was
[Guest]: really stuck because most of India actually registered negative, you know, growth rates.
[Guest]: So it wasn't like one region pulling down the overall population growth, that most of
[Guest]: India, that one decade, you know, I plotted these maps from 1901 to now, every decade.
[Guest]: So they were about 10 or 11 maps.
[Guest]: And they were all positive growth rates.
[Guest]: And this one decade, the population of India fell, right.
[Guest]: And there's no doubt as to why that happened.
[Guest]: It was the influence of 1918.
[Guest]: And when I looked at that map, you know, I said, how is it that there's no book on this?
[Guest]: This was back then, you know, in 2012.
[Guest]: And out of interest, I read, there's one or two research papers, since then, Siddharth
[Guest]: Chandra is a health economist, he's done some work, interesting work on it.
[Guest]: But very, I mean, you can count in single digits, you know, the amount of research done
[Guest]: in on influenza in India.
[Guest]: And it was a big mystery.
[Guest]: But I didn't follow it up back then, because I got more interested in migration.
[Guest]: And that's what I worked on for most part of the last decade.
[Guest]: And that kind of map really came back, when I was in looking at these, you know, mortality
[Guest]: statistics in March, I literally went back to the map, and kind of started exploring.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, one of the things which is coming out with the book, as I mentioned,
[Guest]: is a supplement.
[Guest]: And the supplement has, so how can I say that India lost 20 million people in influenza?
[Guest]: In fact, this is now my estimate, based on a certain method, which I'm using to calculate,
[Guest]: you know, influenza losses.
[Guest]: So that's going to come out in a supplement in the coming week.
[Guest]: And what I do out there is look, again, you know, at this district level data, and kind
[Guest]: of estimate the population shortfall.
[Guest]: So there's a lot of regulatory movements.
[Guest]: And this idea that, you know, pandemics, like you mentioned, the Black Death, they can have
[Guest]: consequences.
[Guest]: So throughout this book, I was trying to understand, no, influenza happened, 20 million people
[Guest]: die, there must be some consequences.
[Guest]: And at least one debate, interestingly, took place by two great economists, you know, Theodore
[Guest]: Schultz and Amartya Sen.
[Guest]: And this was in 1967.
[Guest]: And they had a debate, this was, both of them eventually won the Nobel Prizes.
[Guest]: But they actually had a debate on the impact of influenza on India.
[Guest]: They had this debate on, is there surplus labor in Indian agriculture or not?
[Guest]: So the idea being, you know, if so many people die out, can agricultural productivity still
[Guest]: hold?
[Guest]: And so it's a very interesting debate that they had back then.
[Guest]: There's some now research on influenza and, you know, its impact.
[Guest]: But throughout the book, there's some which I definitely believe had a massive impact.
[Guest]: Now, we can talk about that labor movements and so on.
[Guest]: But there's some also, which I talk, call a speculative, as of now, in the realm of
[Guest]: speculation as to, you know, what was the impact, what are the consequences of this
[Guest]: pandemic, you know, going forward.
[Guest]: And one of them, which I'm very excited about, and I hope to do more research on, is that
[Guest]: it really changes India's urban trajectory.
[Guest]: You know, these pandemics have a disproportionate impact on cities in North India.
[Guest]: And we know for a fact that what are some of the largest cities of India in, you know,
[Guest]: in the early 20th century were Lucknow, Inhabad, and so on.
[Guest]: And they are nowhere on India's urban landscape today.
[Guest]: So a potential reason for this relative decline of, you know, some dynamic cities of the early
[Guest]: 20th century was actually pandemics.
[Guest]: So that's one of the sort of, you know, just like people say Renaissance is because of
[Guest]: Black Death.
[Guest]: These are big questions, you know, big sort of grand theories.
[Guest]: But interesting hypothesis.
[Guest]: I don't think anybody's really got the data right now to prove them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess there are never like absolute answers like, yes, this caused the Renaissance.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, everything is multifactorial.
[Amit Varma]: And this stuff kind of plays into all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of now, you know, begin with the narrative of the book.
[Amit Varma]: And let's talk about cholera.
[Amit Varma]: But before we talk about cholera, give me a context of, you know, what 1817 is like,
[Amit Varma]: give me a context of the time.
[Amit Varma]: Like we know that the East India Company rules less than a third of the landmass of the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Calcutta, Bombay and Madras are your key sites of commerce, as you point out.
[Amit Varma]: Your publishers HarperCollins are formed in that year, effectively.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sort of a context of what is the world like?
[Amit Varma]: Are people traveling?
[Amit Varma]: What is trade like?
[Amit Varma]: What are the kind of lives people live?
[Amit Varma]: So we can then sort of look at the ground on which, you know, everything begins.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: The first thing to note is that there's no railways, right?
[Guest]: That's a big part which happens post 1825, and it really comes to the UK.
[Guest]: So this is a world with no railways, where, like the earlier 2000 years, the fastest way
[Guest]: to get across the subcontinent is the speed of the horse, or you could, you know, go down
[Guest]: the Ganga in terms of waterborne navigation, which is still highly prevalent.
[Guest]: This is a world where movement and migration is happening a bit, but movement, a lot of
[Guest]: it is happening for pilgrimages.
[Guest]: And these are large scale pilgrimages, people going in large groups across the subcontinent
[Guest]: across and which are the major pilgrimage centers, but they continue to be the major
[Guest]: ones today, whether it's Tirupati in the south, or Haridwar in the north, and, you know, different
[Guest]: places and Mecca.
[Guest]: So many people from India actually making this journey to Mecca, even in 1817.
[Guest]: They were around 1 billion human beings in 1817.
[Guest]: So today the population is, you know, seven times more than that.
[Guest]: And about 60% of that was in India and China, you know, so about 400 million in China and
[Guest]: more than 200 million in India.
[Guest]: And the population of US in 1817 was about the size of Calcutta today, right?
[Guest]: So it's literally nothing in 1817, everything, I mean, think of American history, you know,
[Guest]: it really starts off in terms of some demography by the late 19th century, when there's this
[Guest]: mass transatlantic migration.
[Guest]: But before that, it's a really tiny sort of Republic, we have the slave trade still on
[Guest]: in some pockets, but there's growing pressure to quash the slave trade.
[Guest]: In India, the British, the East India Company is on the rise.
[Guest]: But it's only in 1818.
[Guest]: So 1817, they've still not managed to defeat the Marathas.
[Guest]: So that is also in balance of, you know, this tentatively sort of poised, but they've got
[Guest]: the East India Company does operate through these three ports of Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta,
[Guest]: which are doing fairly well.
[Guest]: And the Ottoman Empire is there, but it's not doing, you know, too well.
[Guest]: There's a guy called Muhammad Ali Pasha, who's rising up in Egypt.
[Guest]: There's the Saud dynasty in Arabia, there's the Qing dynasty in China, they've not yet
[Guest]: fought the Opium War.
[Guest]: So China, that's still a proud imperial sort of, you know, rulers in that time, there's
[Guest]: the Qajar dynasty in Persia.
[Guest]: And as you pointed out, you know, Harper Collins, or Harper Brothers, as they were called the
[Guest]: publisher of this book, also started in 1817, just a coincidence out there.
[Amit Varma]: So this is this is really the background.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a book on pandemics arising out of what happened in the pandemic year, essentially.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, cholera is not something new, you've pointed out in your book about how
[Amit Varma]: it had, in fact, been in what we today call India, even as you know, long before this
[Amit Varma]: in 1543, where, you know, it was there in Portuguese ruled Goa, where they had a rule
[Amit Varma]: that okay, every time somebody dies, we shall have a ringing of the bells.
[Amit Varma]: And then so many people started dying that it became a cacophony, and they kind of had
[Amit Varma]: to put an end to it.
[Amit Varma]: And you've spoken about how in 1757, Ahmad Shah Durrani's army was affected by it in 1783,
[Amit Varma]: 20,000 people died in Haridwar, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about cholera, like what is cholera?
[Amit Varma]: What was known about it at the time?
[Amit Varma]: What sort of, you know, happens when one gets cholera?
[Amit Varma]: How fast does it spread all of these things?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a good question.
[Guest]: So you know, what is cholera?
[Guest]: The best way to understand that is firstly in terms of symptoms.
[Guest]: So if you get cholera, you know, what happens to you?
[Guest]: So likely, almost any illness, there's some amount of headache, okay, you start feeling
[Guest]: dizzy, but the classic symptom of cholera is what we would call is loose motions, or
[Guest]: you know, basically, watery stools, but classically rice water stools.
[Guest]: This is the classic description, clinical description of cholera.
[Guest]: Dehydration, you know, that's what's happening with cholera.
[Guest]: That is, you're losing a lot of fluids from your body, you know, especially through bowel
[Guest]: movement.
[Guest]: And that's one of the things about cholera, you know, because it really shocks societies
[Guest]: wherever it appeared, because literally you have to go to the toilet.
[Guest]: I mean, that's what we're talking about in this disease.
[Guest]: Now are there references to cholera before 1817?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: You know, so it's not something which is completely new in 1817.
[Guest]: Historians have pointed out that even in Ayurvedic traditions, people call this particular thing
[Guest]: called Vishu Chika as the closest equivalent to cholera.
[Guest]: Not another sort of disease, a diarrhea.
[Guest]: I mean, we use the word diarrhea today.
[Guest]: Today, hardly anyone talks about cholera, but there are certain differences.
[Guest]: So both of them have similar symptoms, but cholera was far more deadlier.
[Guest]: And often patients would also turn blue because of massive dehydration.
[Guest]: So you know, turning blue was also part of the sort of folklore around the disease.
[Guest]: And case fatality rates were more than 50%.
[Guest]: And this is a nice number to know, because it was kind of observed in different settings.
[Guest]: So what does that mean for, you know, the lay reader right now is that out of 100 people
[Guest]: who get the disease, about more than 50 would die, right?
[Guest]: So that is what we're calling case fatality.
[Guest]: So in COVID-19 today, we're saying it's about one to 2%, right?
[Guest]: But it's much more violent than cholera.
[Guest]: But cholera's case fatality rate at that time was much more than 50%.
[Guest]: And there are references.
[Guest]: So the words for cholera before ranged from Morikshi, which was used in Goa.
[Guest]: Like I said, Vishu Chika is the closest equivalent in Ayurvedic tradition and Haiza.
[Guest]: So Haiza is like Unani practice, you know.
[Guest]: So in the Arabic world, as well as, you know, Muslim practitioners, health practitioners
[Guest]: in India, Haiza was the form.
[Guest]: So for example, if you read this book by Munshi Premchand, you know, called Idga, the father
[Guest]: of that kid, Hameed, you know, it's a very famous story, dies of Haiza, right?
[Guest]: So Haiza is what is known out there.
[Guest]: In fact, that chapter starts with this particular quote by a Hakeem, you know, Syed Amaldar Hussain,
[Guest]: who says, Bahut bade doctor miya Haiza ki surat dekhte hai, to unki rooh kaap utti hai.
[Guest]: And that tells you the kind of thing that doctors are scared to kind of treat patients
[Guest]: with this, because nobody really knows how to treat.
[Guest]: So the mystery of cholera is really the fact that you couldn't treat it.
[Guest]: I think that's the mystery about any diseases that it's, you know, it's so hard to treat
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And by the 1700s, the first English references to cholera come about.
[Guest]: So you can see the word cholera, and it's called cholera morbis, for some reason, in
[Guest]: British medical circles.
[Guest]: And that's really what sticks on.
[Guest]: And so in 1817, when it kind of, you know, breaks out, it's clear to medical practitioners
[Guest]: in India that this is cholera.
[Guest]: But what takes them completely off guard is its virulence.
[Guest]: So you know, so the same diseases, it's been recorded in pilgrimage sites, it's been recorded
[Guest]: as, you know, devastating Haridwar in the 1780s.
[Guest]: So stuff happening before 1817, yet in 1817, when it strikes, it goes across the subcontinent
[Guest]: very fast.
[Guest]: And that's why 1817 is different.
[Guest]: So the most accepted reason for why 1817 and why not earlier, is that there's some sort
[Guest]: of a mutation in the strain of cholera.
[Guest]: We now know cholera is caused by bacteria, that's a different bacteria, and in a virus
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So it's a bacteria, which is later, much later, much we talk more than a century later called
[Guest]: is cholera vibrio.
[Guest]: So today, I mentioned the symptoms of cholera, and cholera vibrio is a sort of agent.
[Guest]: But what happens from 1817, for almost 100 years, is a really fascinating story of people
[Guest]: trying to get to grips with this disease.
[Guest]: And the whole debate on its transmission, how is it spreading?
[Guest]: You know, today, at least we're lucky to know some elements of transmission, though, during
[Guest]: the year, you know, we move from being obsessed about surface transmission.
[Guest]: Now people say, you know, there's not so much surface transmission, it's more of airborne.
[Guest]: But you saw these debates this year, back then, the fundamental, across medical schools
[Guest]: in the world, the idea was that, you know, bad air or impure air, what the British call
[Guest]: as miasma, was the reason for every disease, forget just cholera.
[Guest]: And so cholera is an environmental problem.
[Guest]: That is, if you have filth, if you have dirt, you will get cholera.
[Guest]: That was the causal sort of relationship in 1817.
[Guest]: So that's the sort of background.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, no, it's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And just the way people talk of super spreaders today, and, you know, we were quick to blame
[Amit Varma]: the Tablighi Jamaat a few months back, you know, the same shit was happening back then,
[Amit Varma]: like you point out about how, at one point, you say, quote, Puri and many other pilgrimage
[Amit Varma]: sites were perceived by Europeans in the 19th century, in the way many see Chinese wet markets
[Amit Varma]: of meat in 2020.
[Amit Varma]: That is, as places that generate pandemic, stop, quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak about how, you know, both Hindu and Muslim pilgrimages were blamed for it.
[Amit Varma]: There was even an outbreak in Mecca, where many people died.
[Amit Varma]: And in 1866, the International Sanitary Conference in Constantinople, as it was then blamed Puri
[Amit Varma]: and Mecca.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to kind of go back to this question of trying to figure out what causes it, like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one thing you point out is that really, it's only by the middle of the 20th
[Amit Varma]: century that oral rehydration therapy comes about and people kind of figure out what to
[Amit Varma]: do about cholera, and it isn't such a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: But back then, you have this sort of atmosphere of complete ignorance and all kinds of crazy
[Amit Varma]: theories, like at one point, you know, you describe this one incident in Russia, where,
[Amit Varma]: quote, a few villagers abducted two doctors on duty who espoused quarantine, tied them
[Amit Varma]: to cholera corpses and placed them in a pit.
[Amit Varma]: Their survival would be proof against contagion.
[Amit Varma]: In that particular case, they did survive and were eventually pulled out of the pit,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the other thing that strikes me is that medicine based on science at that
[Amit Varma]: time is at such a primitive stage that alternative medicines are thriving, like you write at
[Amit Varma]: one point, quote, the native physicians, vaids and hakeems did command respect and were enlisted
[Amit Varma]: by the British in relief efforts.
[Amit Varma]: The cures offered could be a mixture of various medical traditions.
[Amit Varma]: The vaids prescribed black pepper, ginger, cloves, and at most beloved Indian ingredient
[Amit Varma]: hing or asafoetida, however you pronounce that.
[Amit Varma]: In Madras in South India, physicians practicing Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha, native to the
[Amit Varma]: region, assisted the government and where the cure seemed to be effective, it won the
[Amit Varma]: appreciation of the locals, irrespective of who the ruling class was, the British or the
[Amit Varma]: local royals, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that, you know, medicine back in the day is so primitive, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for various diseases, you'd have bloodletting as an option and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Hospitals would not yet be sanitized.
[Amit Varma]: So you could actually die because you went to a hospital that, you know, that is why
[Amit Varma]: people would believe in some of these alternative systems like, you know, the explanation that
[Amit Varma]: I give whenever I talk about, you know, why so many people believe in something like homeopathy,
[Amit Varma]: for example, is one, of course, we all know about the placebo effect.
[Amit Varma]: But there's also reversion to the mean that, you know, some diseases you will just automatically
[Amit Varma]: get better over time.
[Amit Varma]: And if you take whatever medicine you think is medicine, at the peak of that, you will
[Amit Varma]: obviously ascribe causation and say, oh, no, no, no, this cured me and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So what's kind of the medical landscape like because, you know, today we think of, okay,
[Amit Varma]: there is science and, you know, there is proper kind of medicine and we have a great understanding
[Amit Varma]: into all of these.
[Amit Varma]: But at that time, everything is kind of faith based depending on whatever you think that
[Amit Varma]: works because nobody really knows anything, right?
[Guest]: What was that like?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, also this today, this notion of Western superiority in medicine, right?
[Guest]: If at all it was, in fact, what I pointed on this book is that for at least these pandemics,
[Guest]: it really didn't matter that much.
[Guest]: Maybe cholera in the late 19th century, but for plague, they figured it out very late
[Guest]: after the pandemic, influenza after the pandemic, so it really didn't help during the pandemic.
[Guest]: But in the early 19th century, they were all the same.
[Guest]: I mean, there was really no advantage that Western medicine gave in, you know, surviving
[Guest]: cholera vis-a-vis Ayurveda, vis-a-vis Unani, vis-a-vis Siddha, which is in South India.
[Guest]: So as you said, you know, completely faith based.
[Guest]: Does that mean, you know, it's completely useless?
[Guest]: Against cholera, it's hard to say, but against basic diseases, I'm pretty sure that some
[Guest]: of these things that they would have been offering must have worked.
[Guest]: Obviously every, you know, there's a credibility criteria and these doctors would have gained
[Guest]: reputation over time only, of course, if things worked, right?
[Guest]: But you know, this is a world where even these doctors living on side by side with massive
[Guest]: superstitions and you have these witches, you have these sorcerers, you have all kinds
[Guest]: of people in especially rural India, but also urban India who command huge respect.
[Guest]: So of course, goddesses and gods, you know, so in Indian history, Sitala is this classic
[Guest]: goddess in Eastern India for smallpox.
[Guest]: But very quickly for cholera, you know, across the 1700s and early 1800s, this Ola Bibi came
[Guest]: into prominence.
[Guest]: And it's really fascinating.
[Guest]: So in 1817 and the years preceding that, Ola Bibi's kind of stock went up much more than
[Guest]: Sitala, you know, and so different temples had to kind of woo, in fact, their own patrons
[Guest]: saying that, no, no, our God can, you know, help you out better.
[Guest]: So it's interesting how religion was, of course, very closely intertwined, you know, with healing
[Guest]: practices.
[Guest]: Also, you know, I point out in cholera, this is a jumping 100 years later, but Christian
[Guest]: conversion, for example, right?
[Guest]: So using epidemics as a pretext for, you know, missionary movement saying that, look, our
[Guest]: science is better.
[Guest]: Actually, it wasn't better for a long period, but the claim that our science is better.
[Guest]: So if you join our religion, you know, you get some benefits out of it.
[Guest]: So this is open game and health being a day-to-day matter, right?
[Guest]: It must have been such an important thing in guiding people's decisions, whether to
[Guest]: convert a religion.
[Guest]: If somebody is going to say that, you know, I can cure you, it is the most powerful kind
[Guest]: of advice, you know, anybody can potentially take.
[Guest]: Even in India today, a lot of the spiritual guru market thrives on healing powers, right?
[Guest]: And so it's a very closely attached notion.
[Guest]: So the medical landscape in 1870s, as you rightly pointed out, very primitive, right?
[Guest]: There are no clear advantages of any system.
[Guest]: And on cholera, as you said, pretty much everyone is clueless.
[Guest]: In fact, some of these things that they were doing, like bloodletting, this was a British
[Guest]: practice, it was completely opposite of what anyone should be doing.
[Guest]: You know, the analogy I use in the book is like, you know, contracting money supply in
[Guest]: a recession.
[Guest]: This is pretty much what they were doing.
[Guest]: That is literally, you know, what you need is actually some amount of fluids in your
[Guest]: body.
[Guest]: And so taking out even some of that was really a crazy idea.
[Guest]: In one of the practices, they would put leeches on the anus to suck out the blood, you know,
[Guest]: really crazy practices which emerged in the 1820s and 1830s.
[Guest]: And all of this on the pretext that cholera was somehow coming from the air, from environment
[Unknown]: and so on.
[Guest]: And so it's really John Snow, who's the hero in this whole fight against cholera,
[Guest]: who in, you know, 1840s and 1850s, figures out that, look, hey, this is not about air,
[Guest]: this is about water.
[Guest]: And that's the big discovery on cholera, that cholera is a waterborne disease.
[Guest]: And yet, even though John Snow kind of proves it in the 1850s, he's not very famous in
[Guest]: his lifetime.
[Guest]: You know, he's now very famous today, but he was not very famous back then.
[Guest]: People maintained to this airborne theory of cholera transmission for literally more
[Guest]: than 60 years.
[Guest]: And the Indian guys, the Indian Medical Service, which are British officers, they were
[Guest]: scientifically trained and so on, was so proud of their science of the airborne theory of
[Guest]: cholera that they rejected John Snow's theory.
[Guest]: And so for until 1900s or so, it was a complete global embarrassment because these Indian
[Guest]: Medical Service people were hell-bent on showing that it was the environment.
[Guest]: Why the environment?
[Guest]: Because they figured out, look, cholera happens only in some parts of the year.
[Guest]: So it can't be just waterborne.
[Guest]: Otherwise, it would be affecting you all through the year, right?
[Guest]: So there must be something with the environment.
[Guest]: So they had their reasons.
[Guest]: They had their own kind of scientific reasoning based on the position they were taking.
[Guest]: But on hindsight, they were completely wrong.
[Guest]: Cholera is mostly a waterborne theory.
[Guest]: Of course, there are new transmission mechanisms found today, but it is generally a
[Guest]: waterborne disease.
[Guest]: And it's only once they figure out transmission that people could start working out on
[Guest]: prevention, cure, and so on.
[Guest]: So that has to wait the truly great scientific revolution called bacteriology.
[Guest]: And so the great bacteriologists like Robert Koch, Louis Pasteur, after everyone who gets
[Guest]: up in the morning drinking milk knows about pasteurization, pasteurized milk.
[Guest]: This is all the great work of certain French and German and a few British scientists in
[Guest]: the late 19th century.
[Guest]: And it's only with that that you can see a dramatic divergence then in medical systems.
[Guest]: So that's really what takes Western medicine ahead, because they start this idea of
[Guest]: experimentation-based science.
[Guest]: They kind of understand what is the idea of the germs creating disease and so on.
[Guest]: And then that, of course, helps in controlling cholera eventually.
[Guest]: But the overall progress is very slow.
[Guest]: The case fatality rates of cholera finally fall down only in the 1910s and 1920s.
[Guest]: And luckily for the Indian Medical Service, it's one of, you know, our or their people
[Guest]: who does this.
[Guest]: And it's a guy called Leonard Rogers who finally figures out that the way to stop a
[Guest]: body from dehydrating is rehydrating it.
[Guest]: And so what he pioneered was this IV method, intravenous method of injecting fluids, saline,
[Guest]: high saline sort of portions into the body, worked it out in Calcutta, took five years
[Guest]: of experimentation, but finally he got it.
[Guest]: And that reduced case fatality rates from 50% to less than 20%.
[Guest]: And today, of course, you know, people say this is the greatest invention in medical
[Guest]: history that is ORT, you know, oral rehydration therapy, because it's so cost effective.
[Guest]: It's so cheap.
[Guest]: It's just a bunch of salts in your mouth and you're ingesting it.
[Guest]: And yet it kind of protects you against diarrhea.
[Guest]: It protects you against an important class of diseases that historically claimed a lot
[Guest]: of lives.
[Guest]: So today, cholera, even if it happens, we know how to fight it.
[Guest]: Unless the strain kind of mutates and again becomes very deadly.
[Guest]: But at least the lead time on bacterial diseases today is very good.
[Guest]: So we can, you know, quickly fight.
[Guest]: But as you pointed out, 1817, very primitive, no real advantage offered by any medical system.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of follow up questions, but we'll save them for after the break.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Now we'll be back in just a minute.
[Amit Varma]: Please go and rehydrate yourself, dear listener.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called Tapchief.
[Amit Varma]: Tapchief at tapchief.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers and Tapchief's network includes more than 125,000 people
[Amit Varma]: as of now.
[Amit Varma]: You want people to make you a web page or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some
[Amit Varma]: digital marketing for you.
[Amit Varma]: Tapchief gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from first hand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about. So do go over to tapchief.com and check out all
[Amit Varma]: that Tapchief has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Chinmay Tumbe about age of pandemics is wonderful new book on, you
[Amit Varma]: know, 1817 to 1920 and the three pandemics that shaped our nation profoundly during that
[Amit Varma]: period and yet we don't remember them as we should and they hold a lot of lessons for
[Amit Varma]: the present day.
[Amit Varma]: So just a phenomenal eye-opening book, you know, from what he was saying just before
[Amit Varma]: the break.
[Amit Varma]: I have sort of a couple of follow-up points.
[Amit Varma]: One is you refer to Jon Snow, right?
[Amit Varma]: So and that whole narrative is very interesting where in 1849, he comes out with a book called
[Amit Varma]: On the Mode of Communication of Cholera and no one pays any attention to him.
[Amit Varma]: Then in 1887, you speak about M.C.
[Amit Varma]: Fennell who comes out with, you know, this paper called Cholera and Water in India, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what I found fascinating about that is you've reproduced a map in the book.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, people who've been following COVID would notice that there are all these
[Amit Varma]: studies of how COVID can spread through droplets in a restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: So you'll have maps of restaurants and where everybody is sitting and, you know, with arrows
[Amit Varma]: to where the droplets are going.
[Amit Varma]: And M.C.
[Amit Varma]: Fennell did a similar thing where he mapped the spread of cholera in a village and he
[Amit Varma]: had like two wells which he marked out and then showed the kind of spread proportional
[Amit Varma]: to the two wells and therefore concluded that it's obviously a waterborne disease, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, despite what Snow had done four decades earlier, no one yet believed and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, advocated things like instead of these wells, we should have mass produced
[Amit Varma]: hand pumps and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Just remarkable scientific work.
[Amit Varma]: And yet no one took him seriously in much the same way that, for example, that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so many lives were lost because people ignored, you know, Semmelweis when he spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the importance of hand washing and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think, like, it seems to me that always within any establishment in pretty
[Amit Varma]: much any context, even outside the context of medicine, there is this arrogance, there
[Amit Varma]: is this lack of humility, you know, there is an accepted way of doing things, of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about things.
[Amit Varma]: And you imagine that this is right.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, anything new that comes up, new truths, new revelations can often take
[Amit Varma]: decades to spread, even in something which literally can, you know, affect lives.
[Amit Varma]: So and it's not just in medicine, it's in economics, it's in governance, in so many
[Amit Varma]: different fields, you find that, you know, authorities are sticking by the wrong way
[Amit Varma]: of doing things for ages, while, you know, the truth is out there.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that you've, you know, kind of thought about?
[Guest]: Yeah, in social science, we say, you know, paradigms go away one death at a time, you
[Guest]: know, it's only when the guy dies, finally, that his disciples, his, you know, chelas
[Guest]: across many PhDs, you know, lineages, who kind of propagate this guy's views throughout.
[Guest]: But the thing with science is that this such thing should not happen.
[Guest]: I can imagine economics, you're a clinician, or you're a Friedmanite, and you know, these
[Guest]: kind of ideologies pass on through PhD students.
[Guest]: But in science, the whole idea of science is fairly objective.
[Guest]: If it's bad science, it gets figured out very quickly.
[Guest]: And so John Snow had kind of figured it out very well.
[Guest]: Europe started implementing that, you know, they started having better water supply systems,
[Guest]: they kind of started accepting it as controversial, but some kind of evidence based approach to
[Guest]: understanding cholera was on.
[Guest]: In Germany, one of the heroes of the sanitation policies guy called Max von Pettenkofer.
[Guest]: And Pettenkofer, interestingly, you know, did not believe in the waterborne theory.
[Guest]: And almost in his death, he committed suicide, finally, in the 1890s.
[Guest]: He maintained this view that, you know, it's the environment and not, he, in fact, actively
[Guest]: looked down upon bacteriology and so on.
[Guest]: Even Florence Nightingale had to be shown a microscope to say, look, this is the new
[Guest]: science, right, and this is what is causing diseases.
[Guest]: And then finally, she accepted.
[Guest]: So often you have to demonstrate, you know, this revolutionary ideas which were coming
[Guest]: back then.
[Guest]: In the case of MC Fern, very interesting, you know, he's a lower rung sort of bureaucrat
[Guest]: in the Indian Medical Service, but completely ignored by the top brass, and by some accounts,
[Guest]: even lost his job because he was actively propagating an idea which would have saved
[Guest]: millions of Indian lives, you know, if people had started getting good water supply systems,
[Guest]: that was all it was needed to prevent muscular heartbreaks.
[Guest]: Interestingly, the Maharaja of Travancore, you know, wrote to him saying that, you know,
[Guest]: I would like to hear more about your ideas and so on.
[Guest]: So there were people, there was a particular audience who was willing to experiment.
[Guest]: But the IMS, Indian Medical Service, hell-bent, in fact, they looked up to Pettenkofer.
[Guest]: They said, if Pettenkofer is saying this, you know, we believe Pettenkofer's theory.
[Guest]: So this is an interesting kind of thing, even in science, because both the IMS and John
[Guest]: Snow are coming from a particular scientific tradition.
[Guest]: But in science, we would say, you know, one thing has to be right, and one thing has to
[Guest]: be wrong eventually.
[Guest]: In this case, these guys held on to this position for far too long.
[Guest]: And eventually, you know, it was kind of demonstrated, clear cut, that it was a waterborne
[Guest]: disease.
[Guest]: And it's only much later that these water supply systems came.
[Guest]: In fact, in Calcutta, cholera started and overall mortality started falling majorly
[Guest]: after 1869, when the pipe water supply was introduced in the city.
[Guest]: So even that was actually a clear cut example of success in how one can prevent cholera.
[Guest]: So you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: You know, these paradigms exist.
[Guest]: And it's very tough sometimes for a revolutionary idea to make its way across the board.
[Guest]: And stuff which today we would take for granted, you know, that if this is what scientists
[Guest]: are saying by, you know, using a particular process of experimentation and so on, there's
[Guest]: much more credibility today.
[Guest]: But back in late 19th century, when the first ideas of bacteriology were coming in, it received
[Guest]: a lot of pushback.
[Guest]: And, you know, the people were very, very skeptical of the claims that they were making.
[Guest]: It really, but it's only with the 1900s, when without a doubt, you know, the ideas of pasture,
[Guest]: caulk, and many others were finally holding sway.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, another thing that kind of struck me when I was reading this book was
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, we look back on those times with hindsight and the accumulated knowledge
[Amit Varma]: that we have, and look at it through that prism, like I sometimes feel I cannot possibly
[Amit Varma]: imagine what it would be like for me to live in the 19th century, because whatever knowledge
[Amit Varma]: I have, I would have to assume it does not exist, I would have to strip it away.
[Amit Varma]: And all those sort of the certainties kind of vanish.
[Amit Varma]: For example, we speak about how, you know, in one sense, you know, the God of religion
[Amit Varma]: is really the God of the gaps, there are so many things you can't explain.
[Amit Varma]: So you bring God as an explanation, you are in prehistoric times, you don't even understand,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the sun, the moon, the rain, so you have gods for each of them, and so on,
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in modern times, the only things that can't be explained is perhaps the things that
[Amit Varma]: will never be explained, which is, or which will never be confronted, like what is the
[Amit Varma]: meaning of life?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, one could just say that, look, rationally speaking, there is no meaning,
[Amit Varma]: it is random and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a little hard to accept.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of these other questions have been answered, like, you know, Douglas Adams once
[Amit Varma]: famously said, when speaking about natural selection, that give me the awe of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: over, you know, whatever, or religion kind of might invoke.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I'm kind of thinking back to the 19th century, when this shit is happening all around
[Amit Varma]: you, people are dying, and you have no clue why some random person is saying it's because
[Amit Varma]: of water, but other people are coming up with various explanations.
[Amit Varma]: And some of these are stunning explanations.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, you write in your book, quote, one Sanskrit scholar from that region
[Amit Varma]: mused that there were three types of disease in the world, for sins committed in past lives,
[Amit Varma]: for sins of the current life, and for accidental sins, and that an epidemic like cholera came
[Amit Varma]: under the second category, which is sins of the current life.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, similarly, you talk about how there are cholera deities all over the place, including
[Amit Varma]: one called Harlul Lala in Bundelkhand.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you know, one of the British dignitaries of that time who was leading them
[Amit Varma]: against the Marathas, in fact, in the third Anglo-Maratha war, Francis Rodden Hastings,
[Amit Varma]: you write about how his men are blamed for killing cows on Lala's grave, which is why
[Amit Varma]: he is effectively now taking revenge and he is a cholera deity.
[Amit Varma]: You also speak about how in the Konkan region on the west coast, witches and sorcerers are
[Amit Varma]: being blamed for cholera and as late as 1943, B. R. Ambedkar writes, quote, it was reported
[Amit Varma]: from Nasik on 1st September that the Hindus of a village attacked an Achuth, which is
[Amit Varma]: a term Ambedkar used, attacked an Achuth family, tied the hands and feet of an elderly woman,
[Amit Varma]: placed her on a pile of wood, which was subsequently set on fire.
[Amit Varma]: All this because they thought she was a cause of the cholera in the village, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And these narratives are crazy.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, they're not like propagating at WhatsApp speed like they do today.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, and today you could argue that despite the fact that we know so much more,
[Amit Varma]: these narratives are still so commonplace, like around Sushant Singh Rajput's death when
[Amit Varma]: he recently dies and all the mad conspiracy theories that came up then, some on news TV
[Amit Varma]: and some even on Twitter and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And again, you've spoken about how back then people used to resist vaccination when it
[Amit Varma]: came about, when it, you know, started becoming sort of popularized in the late 19th century,
[Amit Varma]: because they were like, it'll make us important.
[Amit Varma]: And just today, I saw on Twitter that people are talking about these current vaccines that
[Amit Varma]: I think somewhere in central India, there is this rumor that the men start behaving
[Amit Varma]: like women and the women start behaving like men, which if you ask me is not a very bad
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a sense of overall bewilderment.
[Amit Varma]: So and as a historian who is kind of going in there doing the complete opposite, you
[Amit Varma]: know, making sense of everything, but everybody in your stories in the histories that you
[Amit Varma]: tell, most people are just completely bewildered all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, what is your sense of this?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, whether this kind of reveals something about the human condition and the
[Amit Varma]: progress of science will not affect it?
[Guest]: This is a very deep question.
[Guest]: Because, I mean, this idea of panic, fear, you know, conspiracy, rumor mongering, we've
[Guest]: seen so much of that this year itself, you know, in 2020, maybe not as deadly as the
[Guest]: rumors back then.
[Guest]: But of course, the rumors travel much faster now than back then.
[Guest]: For example, you know, in March, there was this thing about Indian immunity.
[Guest]: And a lot of people say, no, this will not come to India, because we have such strong
[Guest]: immunity.
[Guest]: You know, these people live in clean environments.
[Guest]: And so that's why they get COVID.
[Guest]: Whereas we kind of grow up in these bad environments.
[Guest]: And we, it's almost like this pride that, you know, we can have our own water and food
[Guest]: and the foreigners who come here fall sick.
[Guest]: Now, this is not something to be proud about.
[Guest]: This is, we have bad quality water and, you know, we are kind of immune to it.
[Guest]: But that's only one part of immunity.
[Guest]: There's nothing like full blown, you know, immunity to anything.
[Guest]: That's how we kind of fool ourselves.
[Guest]: You know, we fool ourselves with these nice stories, which vegetarianism, you know, this
[Guest]: huge thing with Indians, or there was one, you know, WhatsApp forward this year, India
[Guest]: has never been the source of pandemics.
[Guest]: And the subtext being, you know, because they are mostly like the argument being because
[Guest]: India has a lot of vegetarians and so on.
[Guest]: But cholera was, I mean, like the world blames China today for nearly a century, India was
[Guest]: seen as China is seen today, an originator of pandemics, you know.
[Guest]: So the sort of classic emotions of fear, that will not stop.
[Guest]: But I think here's what collective memory can do.
[Guest]: You know, if collective memory is there, it's a built in, we know, we can see the markers
[Guest]: and quickly react to that.
[Guest]: So, you know, nobody is in Europe is blaming the Jews for poisoning bells.
[Guest]: This was happening in the 14th century plague.
[Guest]: And of course, it was happening in different ways in the early 20th century, but today
[Guest]: that's not happening.
[Guest]: And so that sort of, you know, collective memory is useful to understand.
[Guest]: I think the thing with pandemics is that when it strikes, it happens so rarely that when
[Guest]: it strikes, people have no clue how to react to it, or any new epidemic.
[Guest]: And that is why, you know, building this collective memory through different generation, passing
[Guest]: that information on to each generation is very important so that people realize that
[Guest]: there are certain patterns, you know, pandemics will happen.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's no need to kind of completely go into panic and rumor mongering
[Guest]: mode.
[Guest]: One needs to trust scientists and hear out at least what they're saying, and so on.
[Guest]: So this, you know, in the 19th century world, given the kind of, you know, the world of
[Guest]: witches and sorcerers and so on, you can just imagine the amount of crazy things.
[Guest]: I mean, Ambedkar was reporting stuff in the 1940s, you know, of people burning, literally
[Guest]: putting people on the stake, so to speak.
[Guest]: Crazy things happening in the name of epidemics in a caste-driven society as India, you know,
[Guest]: where today the word is social distancing.
[Guest]: Historically in India, I mean, it's a different concept, but untouchability, right?
[Guest]: And in the world of epidemics, of course, that took on a huge meaning because often
[Guest]: the segregation in villages and cities meant that the lowest ranking caste, for example,
[Guest]: were confined to the worst amount of food, the worst kind of water, and highly sensitive.
[Guest]: So influenza, for example, you know, the death rates for plague influenza, especially influenza,
[Guest]: was so much higher, you know, among certain social groups of India compared to the rest.
[Guest]: So diseases acted differently, you know, on, you know, different sets of social groups
[Guest]: in the population.
[Guest]: And thus, there was the thing, so if you escaped one plausible hypothesis that, you know, say
[Guest]: the so-called untouchables of that time had a much, much more higher death rates because
[Guest]: nutrition was so poor, right?
[Guest]: So they're really poor and could not withstand these diseases.
[Guest]: But yet, the perception that so many people who are dying of plague influenza belong to
[Guest]: these social groups leads to a new perception that it's them who are causing these diseases.
[Guest]: And so that becomes like a self-reinforcing stereotype.
[Guest]: And what modern science does, of course, to kind of, you know, tell that this is not cause
[Guest]: and effect.
[Guest]: There's a different set of reasons why.
[Guest]: This is why when cholera first struck London and UK in a big way, it hit the poor parts,
[Guest]: you know, of this thing.
[Guest]: And the poor actually thought that it's a way of the rich to get rid of.
[Guest]: So that's an interesting story.
[Amit Varma]: But another of the interesting things that I found, you know, while reading your book
[Amit Varma]: is that typically we think of a pandemic as an event that happened.
[Amit Varma]: And then in a year or two, it's over and it's done and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, cholera pretty much for the whole of the 19th century and even beyond,
[Amit Varma]: you know, plague does.
[Amit Varma]: And as I shouldn't use the term plague does, cholera does.
[Amit Varma]: And some people treat it as six separate pandemics.
[Amit Varma]: But you actually point out that, quote, the six pandemic should be considered as being
[Amit Varma]: nested within one large pandemic extending over a century.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about sort of why you come to this way of thinking about it.
[Guest]: Until like 15 years back, you know, the standard way about nobody would talk about one cholera
[Guest]: pandemic.
[Guest]: There was always the first cholera pandemic, the second one from like 1829 to 33, the third
[Guest]: one from, you know, 1840s, fifth one, sixth one, seventh one, and so on.
[Guest]: And this was partly because of the way cholera was characterized by writers of those times
[Guest]: in the late 19th century and early 20th century when they started recording cholera as an
[Guest]: event in history, the first writers on cholera.
[Guest]: And all of them argued that it all started in India.
[Guest]: And what they're trying to do is like point out each and every outbreak, say, in Mexico
[Guest]: can be linked to it starting in India a few years before that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And this was a chain of events.
[Guest]: So this idea was that every outbreak in the West happened because of some start in India
[Guest]: and then it got transmitted by some mechanism.
[Guest]: The problem with this theory is that oftentimes there was no clear mechanism linking it to
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: You know, Japan, for example, you know, it had outbreaks in many years in the 19th century,
[Guest]: but often there's really no connection.
[Guest]: So connection could come from ships, you know, from people getting off and then contaminating
[Guest]: waters and so on.
[Guest]: So this mystery was actually clarified only in the last 15 years, where people realize
[Guest]: actually cholera vibrio can become endemic, which means it can sustain itself in certain
[Guest]: water systems.
[Guest]: So you don't need like a continuous transmission.
[Guest]: Once it settles down in certain maritime systems, it can kind of lead to outbreaks
[Guest]: nested from those systems themselves.
[Guest]: So the key is, how does the 1817 strain move around the world?
[Guest]: And so plausible hypothesis is that it moved around in the first 10 or 20 years, and then
[Guest]: it settled down and became endemic in certain parts, and it kind of grew out from there.
[Guest]: So in such a reading, then you don't get multiple pandemics.
[Guest]: You're really talking about one large pandemic in the sense that there were outbreaks in
[Guest]: certain times of the year, and only in certain years, it could be activated by reasons concerning
[Guest]: the survival prospects of cholera vibrio.
[Guest]: But beyond that, you know, to point out each and every wave of the pandemic to India was
[Guest]: seen to be faulty.
[Guest]: So you now have a research paper in Japan, which basically shows that actually all those
[Guest]: outbreaks were not linked with India, especially in the later part of the 19th century.
[Guest]: It was more endemic.
[Guest]: It was completely happening within.
[Guest]: And so this new research actually is overturning earlier research, which showed cholera in
[Guest]: terms of waves of pandemics.
[Guest]: And so there's a good one biography of cholera, again, focusing mainly on the endemic
[Guest]: focusing mainly on the West, which basically now makes this very strong case of not calling
[Guest]: it six different pandemics, but calling it one pandemic.
[Guest]: So I'm in a way following that line.
[Guest]: It's really very cutting edge research of the last 10 years, which is actually showing
[Guest]: new kind of it's shedding new light on cholera and how cholera can transmit and become endemic
[Guest]: in certain parts.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of line which I take in this book.
[Guest]: That is not all of this was linked with India.
[Guest]: And this new strain of cholera, which exists in the world today, started roughly in the
[Guest]: 1860s.
[Guest]: And most people point out to, again, a mutation which happens roughly around Indonesia.
[Guest]: You know, and it's now this strain which is found across the world.
[Guest]: Nobody talks about cholera today.
[Guest]: It's still there.
[Guest]: You know, it still hurts some people because it's so easy to treat it today.
[Guest]: You know, so that's why it's no longer an important disease for us to kind of be worried
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: But the strain mutation, the two big ones happened in 1870, it looks like.
[Guest]: And one in the 1960s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you speaking of Indonesia, you pointed out about how as it spread across
[Amit Varma]: Asia, 17,000 people died in what was then called Batavia, now Jakarta.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it's spreading through East Asia, spreading through West Asia, where you
[Amit Varma]: speak of 15,000 people dying in Basra.
[Amit Varma]: And you also sort of talk about and this again struck a chord of, you know, in terms of how
[Amit Varma]: it must have been for a common person to watch someone in his family just die, where you
[Amit Varma]: write quote, in boats and caravans and in deserts and plateaus, people watched in horror,
[Amit Varma]: the passing of rice water stools, and the subsequent deaths, stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that once you know, mentally, you've connected the two, it must be such
[Amit Varma]: a feeling of terror.
[Amit Varma]: When someone close to you gets rice water stools for the first time, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's almost beyond imagination.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of interesting thing that you speak about was that, look, there were four
[Amit Varma]: big diseases of the 19th century, as you say, cholera, plague, smallpox, typhus, and cholera
[Amit Varma]: actually took much fewer lives and malaria.
[Amit Varma]: So and yet it dominates a popular imagination in a much greater sense, you know, you have
[Amit Varma]: love in the time of cholera, you don't have love in the time of anopheles mosquito.
[Amit Varma]: So why is that?
[Amit Varma]: Is it because of the way that people just it happens, and they just die and much more
[Amit Varma]: sort of viscerally shocking, you know, what are the reasons behind that?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it's to do the symptoms, though I should, you know, correct you, we do have
[Guest]: Nana Partekar's dialogue, Ek Machhar, you know, so we do blame the mosquito, at least
[Guest]: for some reasons.
[Guest]: But, but you're right, you know, there is, we don't see malaria kills so many people
[Guest]: even today, you know, we don't call it a pandemic.
[Guest]: It's because it's endemic in certain regions, but there's no real clear evidence of it transmitting
[Guest]: itself across time, like how cholera, plague and influenza did.
[Guest]: That's why we don't call it pandemic, it's far more deadly in terms of, you know, actual
[Guest]: deaths taken, even in this age of pandemics, they're saying 70 million people died because
[Guest]: of these pandemics, but malaria actually killed more people.
[Guest]: So malaria was always the number one sort of killer.
[Guest]: So the difference between cholera and plague, and some of these other epidemics is precisely
[Guest]: the symptoms, you know, with plague, it was this bubo, which basically got these big sort
[Guest]: of boils on your on your body.
[Guest]: And in cholera, it was these rice voters too.
[Guest]: So there's no doubt that there's some kind of horror attached with cholera and plague,
[Unknown]: which did not happen with malaria.
[Unknown]: I mean, the symptoms of malaria were high fever.
[Guest]: You know, that is, you didn't start growing stuff in your body, or you didn't, you know,
[Guest]: have to go to the toilet a thousand times, like in the case of cholera.
[Guest]: So there's no doubt that this added to this, you know, this fear of cholera throughout.
[Guest]: And when it started transmitting, as you said, basically, we see a guy, you know, suffer
[Guest]: with this, it really became a talking point.
[Guest]: And so it became a very, you know, very quickly, people started hating the whole idea of getting
[Amit Varma]: cholera rather than getting, say, malaria.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I guess, you know, the basic symptoms of malaria, like fever, shiver also happened
[Amit Varma]: for many other things.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, you know, you can recover from a fever, but can you recover
[Amit Varma]: from loose motions?
[Amit Varma]: This is not a question we would ask ourselves today.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, among the many sort of historical consequences that you point out, the one that
[Amit Varma]: kind of struck me was the one about the 1857 rebellion, or the First War of Independence,
[Amit Varma]: or whatever one calls it, and chapatis.
[Amit Varma]: What do chapatis have to do with cholera?
[Amit Varma]: Just tell me about that.
[Guest]: It is a debate among historians, you know, but what did the circulation of chapatis convey?
[Guest]: And one line of reasoning is that it conveyed the incoming of epidemics.
[Guest]: So what this, so just to tell you the system, basically, a village would send out this,
[Guest]: let's call him a postman, you know, postal person, and this person would give literally
[Guest]: a box of chapatis, you know, to the next village, and so on.
[Guest]: And so it's like a relay network of chapatis.
[Guest]: And this was, it's a historical fact that this was observed in 1857, you know, a few
[Guest]: months before the actual outbreak began.
[Guest]: And there's actually a research paper now, which connects the dots and says that towns
[Guest]: which got this chapati circulation, basically, as a proxy for impending cholera, you know,
[Guest]: heightened the kind of prejudice of people against the British and made them act more.
[Guest]: So it's an interesting line of causation.
[Guest]: But this idea of chapati circulation, as an interesting traditional knowledge, you can
[Guest]: call it, to warn others that, you know, cholera has come, cholera is in town, right, is a
[Guest]: very interesting and attractive proposition.
[Guest]: But I should say that it's contentious.
[Guest]: Not all historians agree.
[Guest]: There are different interpretations of what chapati circulation meant.
[Guest]: But I think in this book, I think this idea that it was actually connected very closely
[Guest]: with cholera.
[Guest]: And coming to that, you know, 1857, such an important year in Indian history, nobody really
[Guest]: thinks of it as cholera year, you know, but it is a fact that cholera preceded the outbreak.
[Guest]: And a lot of people died, more people died from cholera, rather than arguably the massive
[Guest]: uprising in that year.
[Amit Varma]: No, I know many hipsters on a gluten free diet who would argue that chapatis are a problem
[Amit Varma]: in and of themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, tell me a little bit about the toll of this.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I was intrigued by something that you've pointed out when you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: the toll that, you know, you have estimated that 40 million Indians died due to cholera
[Amit Varma]: between 1817 and 1920, which works out to, you know, 300,000 deaths every year, 5% of
[Amit Varma]: all deaths in the Indian subcontinent during this period.
[Amit Varma]: Now, sort of one, you've pointed out that this is your estimate.
[Amit Varma]: Secondly, you know, he later when talking about influenza, which we'll also chat about,
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out about how, for the longest time, people believe that the figure of the
[Amit Varma]: number of people dead was one of the early figures that were cited at that time, which
[Amit Varma]: is 6 million, but actually 20 million people died.
[Amit Varma]: So some of the work that has gone into this is actually your original research, looking
[Amit Varma]: at the numbers and figuring this stuff out.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how did you do this, what was your methodology, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is where the training in economics and also demography, I mean, the connecting
[Guest]: theme between the first book and second book is actually demography.
[Guest]: Demographers basically study three things, fertility, mortality, and migration.
[Guest]: And my first book is about migration, and this book is about mortality.
[Guest]: So the connecting theme is demography.
[Guest]: And I've been exposed to a lot of demographic research methods, how do you estimate death
[Guest]: with, you know, very few data points, and so on.
[Guest]: So our death statistics, in fact, this is a side note, it's precisely because of the
[Guest]: cholera pandemic that we actually started recording deaths systematically in India.
[Guest]: So this process starts in the early 1860s, after a series of devastating cholera outbreaks
[Guest]: in the years following that.
[Guest]: And the British start the system mainly to monitor the health of their army, right?
[Guest]: So they're not really doing it for the native population.
[Unknown]: But very quickly, they realize there's a need to do that.
[Guest]: They need to sort of document systematically what's happening in the native population.
[Guest]: So India's death registration system, like we have today, the origins of it are the 1860s.
[Guest]: And from the 1870s, annually, province-wise, sometimes even district-wise, the British
[Guest]: systematically collected deaths and the causes of deaths.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, there are huge problems.
[Guest]: You know, the person reporting these deaths was not a well-trained medical doctor.
[Guest]: It was often the village patwari or the tax person, you know, at the village level.
[Guest]: So a lot of, you know, issues around that.
[Guest]: But the general trend that you will see kind of mimics what is happening.
[Guest]: So in some years, if there were a lot of plague cases, you would see a spike in plague cases.
[Guest]: So what I have on a spreadsheet now is a province-level database of all the deaths
[Guest]: between 1870 and 1940s.
[Guest]: So that's what 70 years data.
[Guest]: Now, that's a great database for plague, which starts in 1890s.
[Guest]: That's a great database for influenza, which is recorded under fevers, which makes it slightly
[Guest]: complicated.
[Guest]: But for cholera, it's tricky, because what do I do with this period, 1817 to 1860s, where
[Guest]: there's literally no database, right?
[Guest]: So they're just guesstimates.
[Guest]: And so on what basis does one make guesstimates?
[Guest]: So I then look at all the records.
[Guest]: I look at, you know, the South Park cemetery records.
[Guest]: I look at different records.
[Guest]: And there's these projections.
[Guest]: They're not perfect numbers.
[Guest]: But on average, there were 300,000 people dying of cholera between the 1870s and 1910s.
[Guest]: And that number is going up.
[Guest]: And so what we can say for sure on the basis of that rough number, 250,000 to 300,000 deaths,
[Guest]: is a certain number of millions of deaths of Indians.
[Guest]: The thing with cholera, of course, was that it was partly endemic, which meant that a
[Guest]: certain number of people died every year, irrespective if it was virulent.
[Guest]: So in Calcutta and Eastern India, where it was endemic in those maritime systems, some
[Guest]: people always died of cholera.
[Guest]: How do you make a distinction between what is endemic and what is epidemic?
[Guest]: So I kind of look at only those years where a clear case of epidemic, which means it's
[Guest]: spread all across India, was recorded.
[Guest]: And so my final numbers are 8 million deaths in India in this whole period, which is epidemic,
[Guest]: but actually 31 million people, you know, which is endemic.
[Guest]: And so there's so many more people who died in the average year itself.
[Guest]: And so this 70 million global figure that I have in this book actually does not count
[Guest]: the 31 million deaths of endemic cholera in India.
[Guest]: If you add it to that 70 million, then it actually goes up to more than 100 million.
[Guest]: So a lot of this death accounting, and it's a really morbid task, you know, I mean, even
[Guest]: for a person trained in statistics like me, you know, just to, when you're looking at
[Guest]: those numbers, I mean, just think about 300,000 deaths due to just cholera in one year, at
[Guest]: a time when the population of India is one fourth of what it is today.
[Guest]: And so today we are kind of under by 150,000 COVID deaths on a population, which is four
[Guest]: times larger.
[Guest]: So those death rates themselves are so unbelievably high back then.
[Guest]: So a lot of this book, as I said, the starting point of this book was a statistical database
[Guest]: to try and understand which parts of India had more mortality.
[Guest]: And then in the case of cholera, you know, I have this on page 70 of the book, it's probably
[Guest]: the first time somebody has given global estimates of cholera, because it's kind of tricky.
[Guest]: How do you estimate cholera deaths, you know, across time.
[Guest]: So people have done it for some individual countries.
[Guest]: What I've just done on that table is to kind of aggregate it, again, using certain methods
[Guest]: of years for which we don't have data, but it turns out that Russia had a lot of deaths.
[Guest]: One famous casualty being Tchaikovsky, the famous composer, even his mother actually
[Guest]: died of cholera.
[Guest]: Then you have, you know, Spain, Hungary, France, Germany, UK, all of them about a few hundred
[Guest]: thousand, but Egypt, you know, and Egypt is spectacular in terms of, I mean, the estimates
[Guest]: that I have is, you know, about more than a half a million people out of a population
[Guest]: of nearly 6 million.
[Guest]: So that's about 10% of the population kind of getting wiped out due to just one disease,
[Guest]: cholera, you know, so that's kind of a really spectacular kind of strike rate of cholera
[Guest]: in Egypt.
[Guest]: So that's one part of this project is to just understand who is dying and where is it dying.
[Guest]: That's aided by British maintained colonial statistics.
[Guest]: I should add, we actually don't know much about cholera plague and influenza in places
[Guest]: where we did not record statistics, for example, the princely states in India.
[Guest]: So we know much more about Madras presidency, Bombay presidency, Bengal presidency, or UP,
[Guest]: or United Provinces, but we don't know much about Nizam's Hyderabad.
[Guest]: We don't know much about Mysore.
[Guest]: We don't know much about Rajputana.
[Guest]: And that's because these statistics were never really connected.
[Guest]: So I need to project for them.
[Guest]: So then, you know, I use some other methods to kind of project for them based on basic
[Guest]: population counts and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And lay people often think of statistics as very dry and the eyes glaze over when you
[Amit Varma]: look at big numbers, but numbers are people and I guess part of the task of a skilled
[Amit Varma]: historian is to sort of turn those numbers into stories.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've written about as cholera traveled across the world, how it was changing
[Amit Varma]: history everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: Like in France, you talk about how 300,000 people died and in 1832, there was actually
[Amit Varma]: a rebellion out there.
[Amit Varma]: In Spain, you speak about how the monarch had to come out on the streets to console
[Amit Varma]: the people and tell them, don't worry, we are on top of it.
[Amit Varma]: You speak about, you know, the religious revival in Marseille, which was Catholic at the time.
[Amit Varma]: And interestingly, you speak about, you know, Rabindranath Tagore's grandfather, Dwarkanath
[Amit Varma]: Tagore donating money to France.
[Amit Varma]: You know, how much pride something like that would give our nationalists today.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the consequences of cholera on India.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, not just in terms of deaths, but politics, economics, society itself.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that because it lasted such a long time and took so many lives,
[Amit Varma]: 40 million people.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think two very clearly discernible.
[Guest]: One is of course, 1857.
[Guest]: So we should start talking more about how the pandemic was a backdrop under which the
[Guest]: revolution took place.
[Guest]: One is on health.
[Guest]: You know, there's definitely a, you know, greater demand from the people to improve
[Guest]: public health.
[Guest]: It's not a big demand, but that's, you know, one important aspect of how it started.
[Guest]: Death registration statistics.
[Guest]: The whole idea of tabulating death is a consequence of the pandemic.
[Guest]: That's existing with us even today, you know, what we call as a sample registration system.
[Guest]: That's a 40 year history, but the real roots of recording death in India start from the
[Guest]: 1860s, the cholera pandemic.
[Guest]: A lot of interesting, you know, things, of course, some important people are killed by,
[Guest]: you know, even in 1857, some British generals are killed.
[Guest]: There's this guy in Calcutta, a young 22 year old guy, Henry de Borio, and he's basically
[Guest]: sort of, he dies at 22, but he's a staunch Anglo-Portuguese person who is criticizing
[Guest]: British rule, you know, and unfortunately his death, he dies at a very young age because
[Guest]: of cholera.
[Guest]: Raja Ram Mohan Roy has this very interesting thing about cholera, and this is a larger
[Unknown]: thing about epidemics.
[Guest]: He says, obviously epidemics are horrible because they kill a lot of people, but when
[Guest]: you have so many people like in India, in a labor surplus kind of country, could that
[Guest]: actually improve the lives of people who are left alive, you know?
[Guest]: And that's the whole reasoning between the black death and it kills so many people that
[Guest]: those who survived actually worked with more capital and productivity increased.
[Guest]: And Raja Ram Mohan Roy has this argument, but I couldn't find too much of reference
[Guest]: with cholera.
[Guest]: I found more with plague and influenza, that it had positive consequences for those who
[Guest]: survived.
[Guest]: For cholera, not so much.
[Guest]: It kind of, you know, in Europe, the impact was very clear, they had cholera riots.
[Guest]: So you had like violence attached with cholera.
[Guest]: I mean, I write, you know, the cholera outbreaks in Europe coincided with, you know, Europe's
[Guest]: revolutionary war of year of 1848, the Crimean War in the 1850s, the overthrow of the German
[Guest]: Confederation 1866, the end of France's second empire in 1871, and also in Russian Poland
[Guest]: in 1892.
[Guest]: So, important events in history, which actually coincided, you know, important political events
[Guest]: in both European and Indian history, we talked about 1857, which coincided.
[Guest]: The other part is that cholera coincided very much with famines.
[Guest]: Because what would famines do is, you know, famines also classic starvation kind of deaths,
[Guest]: it would drive people outside in the search of water, because what is a famine in India,
[Guest]: it was basically bad, lack of rainfall.
[Guest]: And in that process, people would congregate towards certain centers where they would find
[Guest]: water.
[Guest]: And that is how with contaminated water, basically, cholera would, you know, just rip through
[Guest]: those populations.
[Guest]: So in India's great famine years, like 1899, 1900, or, you know, 1877, 1878, those are
[Guest]: the years that cholera really shot through the roof.
[Guest]: So cholera also in interaction with famines made it much worse.
[Guest]: And so the public health officials had to really, you know, scamper around.
[Guest]: The biggest implication, of course, of cholera was WHO itself, that it is because of cholera,
[Guest]: that you had this first conference in 1851.
[Guest]: It is the first example of a global health surveillance system, though, of course, it
[Guest]: was pretty much European imperial powers plus the Ottoman Empire trying to understand how
[Guest]: to prevent cholera.
[Guest]: But that is really, they had a series of conferences, 1851, then another one, then 1866, series
[Guest]: of conferences.
[Guest]: That turns out then later, once the League of Nations is formed, it's the same set of
[Guest]: conference people who make a kind of a department.
[Guest]: And that is the genesis of the World Health Organization in 1948, and the WHO, which call
[Guest]: it a pandemic in 2020.
[Guest]: So you can see this unbroken kind of, you know, line connecting cholera and the first
[Guest]: conference of 1851, and WHO announcing it, because it's all linked, you know, it's all
[Guest]: part of that same thing, how do we spread a disease from traveling globally?
[Amit Varma]: What was also fascinating to me was, I thought this will be like, you know, a linear recounting
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that you have three chapters, cholera, plague and influenza, but they all
[Amit Varma]: kind of overlap.
[Amit Varma]: You know, by the time you get to say something like 1918, all these are happening, plus there
[Amit Varma]: is a monsoon that has been disastrous, and everything is just haywire, like you speak
[Amit Varma]: about how the previous year, there was too much rainfall, which was a problem, and the
[Amit Varma]: next year, there is too little rainfall.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, everything is just happening at the same time, along with imperialism,
[Amit Varma]: of course.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on from cholera now, as in fact, you know, humanity is done because
[Amit Varma]: it's pretty much, it's virtually a problem that we have solved, and talk about the plague.
[Amit Varma]: Now the plague's been sort of around for much longer in the consciousness, like I love this
[Amit Varma]: quote with which you started this chapter, which is from, you know, about 1615, from
[Amit Varma]: Iqbal Namai Jahangiri, and I'll read it out, quote, when it was about to break out, a mouse
[Amit Varma]: would rush out of its hole as if mad, and striking itself against the door and the walls
[Amit Varma]: of the house would expire.
[Amit Varma]: If immediately after this signal, the occupants left the house and went away to the jungle,
[Amit Varma]: their lives were saved.
[Amit Varma]: If otherwise, the inhabitants of the whole village would be swept away by the hand of
[Amit Varma]: death.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, which is, you know, the hand of death is also a striking phrase, it just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and this was written before Adam Smith's invisible hand.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also a kind of invisible hand, what a morbid thought.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about how sort of plague is looked at in India and how it comes to
[Amit Varma]: India and in fact, plague at the end of the 1890s didn't even necessarily originate here,
[Amit Varma]: like you point out, it's happening in Hong Kong, it's happening in China.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this and how it is kind of different from, you know, cholera,
[Amit Varma]: which came before and all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, firstly, it was, you know, plague is history's greatest disease, if you had to
[Guest]: put an honour on the like, you know, the great in terms of, you know, this sheer sort of
[Guest]: glamour value attached to it in terms of what it can do, and so on.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because the Black Death was about the plague, right?
[Guest]: So that was one third of Europe, it was a big moment in European history.
[Guest]: Events of plague attacks in Indian history, it must have happened, you know, because we're
[Guest]: saying plague is also endemic among rodents and so on.
[Guest]: Again, so for those who don't know, plague is, we now know that plague is about a bacteria,
[Guest]: Yersinia pestis, as it's called, discovered in the late 19th century.
[Guest]: But until 1890s, nobody knew what really causes plague, you know.
[Guest]: And as you pointed out, all people knew was that rodents and especially rats or mice started
[Guest]: dying in large numbers.
[Guest]: And if you saw that happening, just get out, that was the sort of standard operating procedure
[Guest]: regarding plague.
[Guest]: I do note in the book, and you know, I want to claim this as my little small contribution,
[Guest]: that the Arthashastra has certain references, you know, which seem remarkable about rats
[Guest]: and rodents.
[Guest]: And they also talk about rat attacks and so on.
[Guest]: And all of these things came into play in the 20th century.
[Guest]: And I make this argument that maybe, I speculate, that maybe what the Arthashastra is referring
[Guest]: to was the plague outbreak.
[Guest]: This is something medical historians have not yet revealed.
[Guest]: But plague has sort of always been there in the Indian subcontinent.
[Guest]: But it never became so big as, we don't have evidence of it becoming so big as it did in
[Guest]: the late 19th and early 20th century.
[Guest]: And the fundamental way it kind of works, we now know, is from, it comes from rodents
[Guest]: to humans via the bite of a rat flea.
[Guest]: But this transmission mechanism and just unraveling that mechanism itself is, you know, one can
[Guest]: write books on that, it is so fascinating, that whole debate.
[Guest]: But in the 19th century, it's not that, you know, in fact, my understanding of plague
[Guest]: was that it comes to India out of nowhere in 1896.
[Guest]: But even in India in the 19th century, you know, it hits Ahmedabad in 1814, I think,
[Guest]: you know, early part of the 19th century, it hits Ahmedabad and there are gruesome accounts
[Guest]: of plague.
[Guest]: And the thing with plague, even more than cholera, so in cholera, the bad things, you
[Guest]: keep going, you know, you keep going to the toilet, in plague, you can see it, you know,
[Guest]: there are these large black lumps, which develop in your body.
[Guest]: So this is almost a bit like leprosy in the sense that this is a disease which kind of
[Guest]: leaves its mark on its victims.
[Guest]: And of course, there are different types of plague, there's also mnemonic plague, which
[Guest]: is, you know, which does not leave such marks necessarily.
[Guest]: But the principle, the classic, you know, plague leaves these marks and they stand out
[Guest]: in, and that's why it's also recorded by travelers.
[Guest]: And we have more evidence of plague in history than many other diseases.
[Guest]: So it really breaks out in a big way in China.
[Guest]: The way historians have classified is three pandemics.
[Guest]: So the first one is called the Justinian plague.
[Guest]: And new research is suggesting that it was not as big as it was previously thought, kind
[Guest]: of affected the Mediterranean world, you know, so this place around, you know, Egypt, Turkey
[Guest]: today, and this is we're talking about, you know, the sixth century CE, the time of Emperor
[Guest]: Justinian of the Byzantine Empire.
[Guest]: So that's one, the first plague pandemic as it's called.
[Guest]: The second plague pandemic is Europe in between 1348 and 1353.
[Guest]: But there are repeated plague outbreaks throughout Europe, you know, until the 1700s.
[Guest]: So London, for example, most famously was ravaged first by the plague and then by fire,
[Guest]: and this is in 1660s or so.
[Guest]: But plague kind of stops, you know, it hits, I think the last time it hits Europe in a
[Guest]: big way is Marseilles, if I'm not mistaken, 1720s, but after that, it doesn't hit Europe.
[Guest]: After that, it's pretty much China, you know, and so that's where the accounts of plague
[Guest]: come.
[Guest]: It's pretty much Egypt, interestingly, and also India.
[Guest]: And so when it breaks out in a big way in China in the 1850s and 1860s and 1870s, it
[Guest]: really captures the imagination of a lot of doctors.
[Guest]: But it becomes a global issue when it reaches Hong Kong in 1894.
[Guest]: And that's when we kind of start saying, you know, the third plague pandemic really begins
[Guest]: because from Hong Kong, then it goes around the world because Hong Kong was a major trade
[Guest]: center.
[Guest]: It also, you know, exported a lot of food grains and food grains was a classic sort
[Guest]: of storage point where rodents would go.
[Guest]: And that is how, you know, that's the association between food grains, rodents, and the spread
[Guest]: of plague, which is a classic transmission mechanism.
[Guest]: And so from China, the most accepted theory is that it came to Bombay from Hong Kong and
[Guest]: from Bombay, it spread everywhere.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that there was no plague before that.
[Guest]: There was plague in Garhwal.
[Guest]: It was called actually Mahamari.
[Guest]: Mahamari is the word today we use for pandemic.
[Guest]: The word epidemic, by the way, in, you know, in Indian language, it's either Mari or Mari.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Used in different contexts for at least more than a thousand years, I think.
[Guest]: More of Mari in North India and more of Mari in South India.
[Guest]: But Mahamari, which is really pandemic, you know, in today's parlance, was used to describe
[Guest]: plague in the Garhwal region in North India.
[Guest]: And this is, you know, like 1850s and so on.
[Guest]: This is in British reports, but 1896, it comes to Bombay and that's when, you know, all hell
[Guest]: breaks loose.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fascinating how the numbers are like you, you've written about how, when it hit
[Amit Varma]: Canton in 1894, there was an 80% case mortality rate, 80%.
[Amit Varma]: And interestingly, people in upper stories were surviving because obviously, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a little further away from rats and those pesky little rat fleas that they carry.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Canton lost 40,000 people in a day and, you know, you've quoted this wonderful
[Amit Varma]: poem.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful because I enjoyed reading it.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a wonderful, wonderful poem per se, but it's very enjoyable called The Plague
[Amit Varma]: of Bombay by B.F.
[Amit Varma]: Patel about Mandvi in 1896.
[Amit Varma]: So I will just read it out for the amusement of my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, I stand in Mandvi all around with cries of woe the streets resound.
[Amit Varma]: This quarter crowded at the best first falls a victim to the best.
[Amit Varma]: The Jains and Bhatia sat to tell first in alarming numbers fell in every home a death
[Amit Varma]: or two meets a beveled gazer's view.
[Amit Varma]: These sects seemed as picked out to bear alone the burden of despair.
[Amit Varma]: The other races as yet free could not the lurking danger see, half callous to their
[Amit Varma]: neighbor's woes.
[Amit Varma]: The plague disturbed not their repose, but soon all undeceived they stand.
[Amit Varma]: The ravager with scythe in hand scowls every corner of the land.
[Amit Varma]: Top quote and, you know, apologies to all the Jains and Bhatia who must have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: reacted with alarm when I read these words out.
[Amit Varma]: These are not my words.
[Amit Varma]: This is from The Plague of Bombay by B.F.
[Amit Varma]: Patel.
[Amit Varma]: And there's even, you know, a touch of nigh molar about this in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the other races as yet free could not the lurking danger see.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you've pointed out it early on.
[Amit Varma]: The numbers are not crazily alarming, like in 1896, you know, 3000 people are recorded
[Amit Varma]: as dying, then 50,000 the next year, 100,000 the next year, pretty bad, but not yet, kind
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, hysteria or pandemic levels.
[Amit Varma]: And most of these are in Bombay presidency.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, what's going on with the plague in the popular consciousness
[Amit Varma]: at this point in time?
[Guest]: Yeah, the first, you know, that's why I have a whole section called crisis in Western India,
[Guest]: 1896 to 98.
[Guest]: The government of India, British India goes bonkers, you know, and they're doing this
[Guest]: because they don't want plague to reach Europe, you know, so that's the fear they've been
[Guest]: battling cholera all these years, they've got a grip on cholera, cholera is no longer
[Guest]: important in Europe.
[Guest]: But plague invokes this memory of the Black Death, you know, so, and again, it's the collective
[Guest]: memory.
[Guest]: That's what I'm talking about in this book, it's that collective memory, which is driving
[Guest]: them to say, at no cost shall plague enter Europe.
[Guest]: And their principal point of interest is Bombay, and of course, Hong Kong.
[Guest]: And so they, you know, this epidemic act, which we are living under today is the creation
[Guest]: in February 1898, where this Weissrheim-Elgin basically rolls out, they basically say we
[Guest]: have to control this, and they impose these most draconian measures, which most public
[Guest]: health experts would say is, you know, not right.
[Guest]: Not because, I mean, for the simple reason to combat any epidemic pandemic, you need
[Guest]: to win the trust of people.
[Guest]: If you don't win the trust of people, nothing can work.
[Guest]: And so that's exactly what happened, they went around with search operations.
[Guest]: And on hindsight, completely wrong science, they thought it was just poverty and filth,
[Guest]: which led to plague.
[Guest]: If that was true, you know, Calcutta, people said Calcutta got cholera because of its filth.
[Guest]: But Calcutta rarely suffered from plague.
[Guest]: It was really about the rats and fleas and the particular nature of rats and fleas.
[Guest]: And this got known only after 1905, in a big way.
[Guest]: So for the first seven years of this pandemic, they were going on throwing disinfectants.
[Guest]: What will disinfectants do?
[Guest]: They're not, I mean, this is the idea again, of some sort of airborne transmission, just
[Guest]: in somewhere there in this medical service.
[Guest]: So they went around.
[Guest]: So the cover of the book, for example, shows a flushing, you know, engine used to kind
[Guest]: of use, it looks a little like a fire and, you know, fire situation.
[Guest]: When you think of how actually plague gets transmitted through rodents and fleas, it's
[Guest]: all completely wrong prevention measures.
[Guest]: And what this meant was massive clampdown on individual liberty, and huge pushback,
[Guest]: you know, and pushback came in interesting ways.
[Guest]: People were, people were scared and hurt, caste taboos, for example, like, how can you
[Guest]: touch me?
[Guest]: You know, so how can you inspect my wife at the railway station?
[Guest]: So there were opposition coming from all sorts of, you know, ways.
[Guest]: How can you let, how can you put me in a hospital next to a person of another caste, for example.
[Guest]: They had this strict segregation law.
[Guest]: So if you got plagued, you had to go to the hospital, there was no, and you would be separated
[Guest]: from your family.
[Guest]: And this is important because this is the first time the British state really intervenes
[Guest]: in Indian lives in a major, major way.
[Guest]: And the pushback is tremendous.
[Guest]: You know, this is, I would say, like 1857, though we didn't have an uprising, you know,
[Guest]: we got certain reactions.
[Guest]: In Pune, there was an assassination, Walter Ryan was assassinated by the Sapika brothers
[Guest]: because they thought that, you know, this guy's breaching all limits into our society.
[Guest]: And it's the birth of Tilak as this massive star, you know, Tilak goes to jail, Ganpati
[Guest]: is banned, you know, Ganpati festival is banned.
[Guest]: Interestingly, Ganpati, you know, has his rodent on the side, so that's a side story
[Guest]: of the plague.
[Guest]: But, you know, when he's released from jail, Tilak is a star.
[Guest]: So it's literally the plague, you know, which launches him onto the national stage in a
[Guest]: big way.
[Guest]: It makes Gokhale a big star later on, Gokhale becomes, you know, the head of Pune municipality.
[Guest]: So it's also birthplace, you know, plague is a backdrop, especially in Western India,
[Guest]: because the British government goofs up so spectacularly that the pushback is tremendous.
[Guest]: And, but the paradox is, a lot of what even I had heard of the plague, you know, before
[Guest]: starting on this book, was of this period, 1896 to 98.
[Guest]: And I thought this was when plague really hit, and this was the intensity.
[Guest]: It turns out that afterwards, actually, the British kind of said, you know, we need to
[Guest]: change track, we need to be having a different approach.
[Guest]: But plague really starts hitting India after 1900.
[Guest]: And that's when the numbers start going through the roof.
[Guest]: And you know, we're talking of like, in one year, a million deaths just because of plague.
[Guest]: And it's not Bombay city, it's really places like Dharwad, Belgaum, Satara, you know, a
[Guest]: lot of these places in Bombay presidency, which get affected.
[Guest]: And a lot of it was because of, basically, 20 years later, they realized the best way
[Guest]: to prevent plague was rat proofing, you know, if you could keep the rats out, you wouldn't
[Guest]: get plague.
[Guest]: And that is why throughout the pandemic, soldiers in the Indian Army, you know, very few of
[Guest]: them died due to the plague.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because of the cantonments.
[Guest]: Cantonments were nice pukka structures, you couldn't get plague in the cantonments.
[Guest]: But you could get plague in basically, you know, what we call as kutcha structures.
[Guest]: And that is where it had its greatest intensity.
[Guest]: But for plague, you wanted the correct kind of rat and the correct kind of rat flea.
[Guest]: So the distribution within India was not because in a certain places are more dirty than others.
[Guest]: It just so happened that some places had a particular kind of rat flea.
[Guest]: So in South India, rat flea was not this ex-cheapest variety, it was a different variety.
[Guest]: So it was not an efficient transmitter of plague from rodents to humans.
[Guest]: So that is why South India kind of escaped plague pretty much.
[Guest]: But in Punjab, UP and, you know, Bombay presidency, they had the perfect kind of rat and perfect
[Guest]: kind of rat flea, perfect for plague transmission.
[Guest]: And that's why it kind of got ravaged.
[Guest]: And that's why arguments on sanitation again fell flat, because people are pointing out,
[Guest]: you know, for 100 years, you've been telling us that Calcutta has cholera because Calcutta
[Guest]: is dirty.
[Guest]: And yet Calcutta kind of escaped plague.
[Guest]: So here was a paradox.
[Guest]: And it's only, you know, such kind of questioning, which led scientists to really find out the
[Guest]: roots of plague.
[Amit Varma]: Optimal rat plus optimal rat flea.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to come back to rats later, because there is much about rats in the book as well.
[Amit Varma]: But first, this question that strikes me and it's almost resonant in a way that when I
[Amit Varma]: think of current times, you know, one of the first things that struck us in March, at least
[Amit Varma]: in India, is that this is a very alarming situation that is developing.
[Amit Varma]: And even if we don't have collective memory, at least we can see what's happening in Italy
[Amit Varma]: and Spain and everything and can take it as seriously as it requires.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, there is limited state capacity.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there is no option for a state in a country like ours, but to resort to blunt
[Amit Varma]: tools, which in our case in India was of course, a blunt tool of the lockdown and with its
[Amit Varma]: various costs and benefits.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when I was sort of reading about what the British government did at the time
[Amit Varma]: of the plague, it seems that what you have is a bunch of blunt tools, which also arise
[Amit Varma]: from a time of epistemic uncertainty in the sense that you don't know what the hell is
[Amit Varma]: going on, really.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, today, we have a much better idea.
[Amit Varma]: From the start.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, despite all the uncertainty about masks, and you know, whether it is surface
[Amit Varma]: borne or whatever, at least we had a much better idea than those guys back then did.
[Amit Varma]: And I will just like I'll quote from your book about some of the blunt tools that came
[Amit Varma]: into force at one point, you write, quote, as part of the plague prevention measures,
[Amit Varma]: thousands of buildings were cleared out citing unsanitary living conditions, property was
[Amit Varma]: destroyed and burnt, and drains were regularly cleaned, tiles were removed from the roofs
[Amit Varma]: of houses and dwellings with reported infections were marked with signs outside them and treated
[Amit Varma]: as if they were on fire.
[Amit Varma]: They were flushed with water from fire engines and flushing pumps mixed with disinfectant
[Amit Varma]: such as Cresol or phenyl based potassium permanganate.
[Amit Varma]: Houses were also lime washed and sulphur was burnt inside.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you talk about how the poor are panicking because they're often being
[Amit Varma]: left homeless because the dwellings have been targeted, they rise up against the government.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the slogans of that time is Mar Dalo Goreko, which I don't need
[Amit Varma]: to translate.
[Amit Varma]: And in Pune, you know, speak about Walter and quote, Walter and went in for the harshest
[Amit Varma]: containment measures anywhere in the country, with intensive house searches conducted by
[Amit Varma]: European troops to identify sick people and transfer them to the hospital.
[Amit Varma]: In the event, accusations of forced examination and misconduct, especially with women, flew
[Amit Varma]: thick and fast.
[Amit Varma]: Rand was shot on 22nd June 1897 by brothers from an outrage family with the surname Chhapakar,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, this has repercussions, Tilak becomes a superstar, Gokhale, you know,
[Amit Varma]: becomes involved there in 1907, which is when, as you point out, a million people die.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the Congress is sort of split between the moderates led by Gokhale and the extremists
[Amit Varma]: led by Tilak.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of fascinating, like, again, I'm quoting, you'd go during the peak of the
[Amit Varma]: plague pandemic in India, more than inoculation or sanitation, it would be quarantine and
[Amit Varma]: evacuation that would become the norm.
[Amit Varma]: So in general, when you think of the state's response to events like this, and also then
[Amit Varma]: the pushback against the people to the state, you know, how sort of are there patterns that
[Amit Varma]: emerge in terms of, you know, overreach and so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: What are your observations?
[Guest]: One was, you know, clearly a big issue, while trying to enforce some sort of a lockdown
[Guest]: then is, of course, what do we do with migrant workers, you know, that's a big issue, of
[Guest]: course, which happened this year, where I think, you know, we clearly got it wrong,
[Guest]: in my view.
[Guest]: And, you know, we had a migration crisis earlier this year.
[Guest]: Interestingly, the British had a very different view, you know, they took this view that look,
[Guest]: whatever we do, these guys are going to go back.
[Guest]: If we have a harsh lockdown, these guys will walk back.
[Guest]: If we shut down the railways, they will walk back.
[Guest]: So interestingly, for all their other faults, the British actually allowed these people
[Guest]: to go home, you know.
[Guest]: Now, did that lead to a spread of the pandemic?
[Guest]: There's no evidence of that, because there's no spike in deaths, you know, immediately
[Guest]: after that.
[Guest]: But what it enabled was that to Bombay, half of Bombay, 400,000 people actually left Bombay,
[Guest]: you know, and they came back just like this year, people are coming back now to the cities.
[Guest]: But that's a classic response in a pandemic that is returned.
[Guest]: So migrant workers will want to go back, you know, the same voices that we heard this year,
[Guest]: were heard back then, that is marna hai toh gaon mein marenge, the psychology that, you
[Guest]: know, if you want to die, we'd rather go back home and die.
[Guest]: So that's one classic response, clearly, which we saw back then, and what we saw today.
[Guest]: The other, which is really interesting is that the best strategy was actually evacuation.
[Guest]: And this was traditional knowledge.
[Guest]: This was passed down from generation to generation, you know, started off with that quote.
[Guest]: That is, if you see these rodents coming out, spinning and dying, the best thing to do is
[Guest]: move out.
[Guest]: And, you know, this traditional knowledge also had many aspects to it.
[Guest]: So entire villages would vacate and stay out during the night, there was some implied thing
[Guest]: that there's something to do with nighttime.
[Guest]: And later on, science actually showed that it's, you know, a lot of this is transmitted
[Guest]: at night, that is, is rat fleas actually really work best at night.
[Guest]: So aspects of traditional knowledge were embedded.
[Guest]: The British kind of, you know, did not keep to it, and later on started respecting.
[Guest]: So by the, even, you know, by 1905, 1910, the British showed us the best strategy actually
[Guest]: is to let villagers camp out of villages, and let the season pass off of plague, and
[Guest]: then come back.
[Guest]: That became the most cost effective strategy, right, in the absence of any powerful vaccine
[Guest]: or inoculation, in the absence of any breakthrough in, you know, in like a antibiotic, which
[Guest]: was not existent back then.
[Guest]: The only thing that people could do was what people are doing for centuries, that was evacuation.
[Guest]: And I estimate easily 30 million people must have evacuated at some point or the other
[Guest]: in this terrible sort of decade.
[Guest]: And I've now come across, you know, first person accounts of people who lived on the
[Guest]: edges of the villages, not just villages, entire towns, you know, observers, there's
[Guest]: a reference in this book, Bijapur, which is not a small place, you know, it's got tens
[Guest]: of thousands of people, the entire town would camp outside.
[Guest]: So it would be a town completely locked with everyone living outside, purely in order to
[Guest]: escape this thing.
[Guest]: The way to beat plague was, of course, was to build good buildings, good quality buildings.
[Guest]: But there was no demand for that.
[Guest]: And there was no supply for that.
[Guest]: So that never really, you know, came apart.
[Guest]: The learning from that is, you know, massive state overreach in the first phase, the British
[Guest]: learned from that, eventually, the plague manual basically started off pretty much by
[Guest]: saying respect people, and you know, like, you know, that if you have to take into people
[Guest]: in confidence, and that has kind of persisted, all public health manuals will tell you that,
[Guest]: you know, you have to win the trust of people.
[Guest]: The second thing that the sort of plague did was, of course, reorganize urban governance.
[Guest]: Now, this had its pros and cons, there were some long needed things like sort of revamping
[Guest]: the sewerage systems, because that's where a lot of the rats were breeding.
[Guest]: So all of that were good things.
[Guest]: But in this process, of course, mass scale displacement, as you pointed out, a lot of
[Guest]: the poor people, you know, had to come out on the streets.
[Guest]: And so in those terms, a huge negative repercussions.
[Guest]: One of the consequences, of course, of plague is today, you know, in every city, there's
[Guest]: a development authority board.
[Guest]: Okay, so you have like this MMRDA in Bombay, or DDA, Delhi Development Authority, the roots
[Guest]: of that line, the plague, you know, it's the first the Bombay Improvement Trust is formed
[Guest]: as a response to the plague, the Hyderabad Improvement Trust is formed as a response
[Guest]: to plague.
[Guest]: And so though our cities, I think, you know, not really, you know, the best examples of
[Guest]: cities in the world, but whatever basic semblance of urban governance came into account, was
[Guest]: precisely because the plague prompted, you know, things.
[Guest]: Shivaji Park, most famously in Bombay, you know, was created as a response to having
[Guest]: roomy, airy flats, these are theories as to how plague transmit.
[Guest]: And so a lot of these sub-organization, more broadly, started in a big way in India, thanks
[Guest]: to the plague.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you referred to the guideline of how the state should treat the people.
[Amit Varma]: I'll read out this line that struck me from the Punjab Plague Manual in 1909.
[Amit Varma]: And it says, quote, the cardinal principle of all plague administration must be that
[Amit Varma]: no pressure or compulsion in any shape or form is to be brought to bear on the people.
[Amit Varma]: Encouragement, persuasion and the provision of facilities for carrying out the measures
[Amit Varma]: advocated are the only legitimate means of influencing and guiding public opinion in
[Amit Varma]: the direction desired.
[Amit Varma]: Stop, quote, and, you know, another resonant part was about sort of the quarantine circumstances
[Amit Varma]: like recently, again, just today on Twitter, I came across this sort of disturbing piece
[Amit Varma]: about Harsh Mandar about he got COVID and got himself admitted to a hospital and things
[Amit Varma]: were so bad that, you know, he lost his memory for 10 days effectively and kind of lucky
[Amit Varma]: to get out of there.
[Amit Varma]: And as he pointed out, despite all the privilege and social capital and all that, so think
[Amit Varma]: of what's happening to others.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, again, you can read an echo of it in the book, you've quoted from, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the Shanta Gokhale translation of Lakshmibai Tilak's Mithi Chitre.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll read that bit out.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, this is from more than a century ago, but it need not be.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, the cottages were ventilated by openings about a span long running along the top and
[Amit Varma]: bottom of the walls.
[Amit Varma]: The walls were made of tin.
[Amit Varma]: They got so cold at night that we felt we would freeze over.
[Amit Varma]: We were surrounded by the sick, they screamed and beat on the tin walls.
[Amit Varma]: At times a patient would climb onto a wall and jump with a loud thud into the neighbouring
[Amit Varma]: room.
[Amit Varma]: The floors of the cottage had not been levelled.
[Amit Varma]: When you walked, pebbles bit into the soles of your feet.
[Amit Varma]: There was no food in our stomachs and no sleep in our eyes.
[Amit Varma]: Tara's, her daughter, Tara's screams were heart rending.
[Amit Varma]: I thought if Yama had a kingdom anywhere, it had to be here.
[Amit Varma]: The place was terrifying.
[Amit Varma]: The night was terrifying.
[Amit Varma]: The surroundings were terrifying and the state of my heart was terrifying.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, again, I thought I should read this out for the benefit of the listeners
[Amit Varma]: and I'm just going to go right out and sort of buy, you know, Smriti Chitre.
[Amit Varma]: And to go back to what we said earlier about people forming crazy narratives over all these,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've mentioned a bunch of rumours that came about, such as, you know, the British
[Amit Varma]: are collecting Indian bodies to extract momai, a fluid to save themselves.
[Amit Varma]: This was one rumour.
[Amit Varma]: Another rumour was about how, you know, for vaccination, the needle was a yard long.
[Amit Varma]: You died immediately after the operation.
[Amit Varma]: You survived the operation just six months and then collapsed.
[Amit Varma]: Men lost their virility and women became sterile.
[Amit Varma]: The deputy commissioner himself underwent the operation and expired half an hour afterwards
[Amit Varma]: in great agony.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Unrelated question.
[Amit Varma]: Why does this shit spread like I had Pratik Sinha of Alt News on my show, you know, more
[Amit Varma]: than a year ago.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we were discussing those crazy rumours on WhatsApp where people are talking
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, children being kidnapped by strangers.
[Amit Varma]: And those rumours were constantly being modified with, you know, whichever area they were meant
[Amit Varma]: to reach out to that area being put in.
[Amit Varma]: And as a consequence, people were believing that rubbish and they were actually lynching
[Amit Varma]: strangers who happened to pass through their village.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I understand that, you know, we are a species which explains a very complex world
[Amit Varma]: through simple stories.
[Amit Varma]: But why these kind of stories?
[Amit Varma]: Why this sort of morbid fascination that exists?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know that this is not related either to the book or to economics or history or
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: I think there's something about death itself, right?
[Guest]: I mean, death being the most natural, but also something which everyone is obsessed
[Guest]: about that really sparks off all sorts of conspiracy theories.
[Unknown]: I would say not just epidemics, you know, even the suicide like we saw earlier this
[Guest]: year or there's something about death, which makes it very easily pliable to gossip.
[Guest]: I think that's that's really the root.
[Guest]: Now you combine that with a general atmosphere of fear and panic like in a pandemic.
[Guest]: And what you get is quite a lethal sort of mix of fake information, which either this
[Guest]: year or especially, you know, during the plague transmitted like wildfire.
[Guest]: I think also what matters is the credibility of the state, you know, and because British
[Guest]: India came down so harshly that they kind of did not gain the trust of the people for
[Guest]: a very long time.
[Guest]: And so even on vaccination, you know, later on, there's a quote in this book, it says
[Guest]: the same vaccine where people were almost causing a riot because the vaccine was introduced.
[Guest]: Later on, there was literally a riot for the vaccine, that is, people saw the benefits
[Guest]: of the vaccine and then wanted that vaccine.
[Guest]: So the whole mindset shifted in the span of about 25 years.
[Guest]: But getting this idea of inoculation and vaccination took so much time.
[Guest]: And often these doctors and so on had to literally inject themselves, like what Joe Biden just
[Guest]: did, you know, sort of take that first shot and say that, you know, this is this is fine.
[Guest]: So I mean, I'm not an expert on psychology, but I would imagine that under, you know,
[Guest]: heightened situations of stress, it's definitely something to be said about the exponential
[Guest]: rise in, you know, rumors and spread.
[Guest]: And so that's why you need a credible state and a government which will give you good
[Guest]: information from time to time.
[Amit Varma]: The interesting thing about these kind of stories is that they don't just happen during
[Amit Varma]: heightened stress or, you know, we are just surrounded by so much crazy conspiracy theory
[Amit Varma]: all around that it's a little bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also in the middle of all this superstition and blind faith, there is also
[Amit Varma]: some great science happening.
[Amit Varma]: I was especially struck by the science around rats and cats, which simultaneously evolved
[Amit Varma]: during this period, like you've spoken about how there was this municipal commissioner
[Amit Varma]: of Bombay PCS know, who charted in your words, quote, charted the migration path of rats
[Amit Varma]: within the city from the east to the west and then to the north, and emphasized that
[Amit Varma]: rat migration and mortality impeded local efforts to contain the plague among humans
[Amit Varma]: in newer regions.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So my question is, how is he charting the migration of rats?
[Guest]: Yeah, they're literally taking samples, you know, they're taking samples.
[Guest]: I mean, this is a really amazing story, this 25 year period where people are really studying
[Guest]: rats at, you know, multiple levels and also cats, you know, as I pointed out at one place.
[Guest]: And what Snow is doing is, you know, they're taking samples of rats found dead.
[Guest]: And they're kind of literally tracking.
[Guest]: So they have these monitors of rats to see how many dead rats are we getting from different
[Guest]: locations.
[Guest]: And so they draw these charts and rat, I mean, putting the number of rats found dead, or
[Guest]: even caught alive, you know, this becomes a statistic for almost 25 years, a hotly looked
[Guest]: up statistic during the plague years, believe it or not, is, you know, how many rats died
[Guest]: in your locality.
[Guest]: And this whole phenomenon of rat catchers, you know, becomes a big deal.
[Guest]: So yeah, in this particular case, you know, before the migration of humans, it actually
[Guest]: starts by looking at the migration of rats, and how they are, they're going.
[Guest]: And again, the science is not clear, it's, even today, we don't know exactly how rodents,
[Guest]: because, you know, they can go very long distances, even just by foot.
[Guest]: The rat fleas can't go, you know, so they're two vectors, right?
[Guest]: So there's a rat and there's a rat flea, the rat flea has to be embedded in the rat.
[Guest]: But the rat flea can't go very far, unless it's nested in, say, shirts or cotton, which
[Guest]: is a classic, you know, transmitter, or the rats themselves.
[Guest]: But the rats themselves can sit in the storage, and they can go by train wagons and reach,
[Guest]: you know, Punjab, for example, and then, you know, infect other other rats and so on.
[Guest]: But one thing we should talk about is also that more rats died than humans.
[Guest]: You know, this is the thing about plague, that people, you know, blame the rats, yes,
[Guest]: we blame them.
[Guest]: But actually, it's the rats at the receiving end, you know, and it's only when rats die,
[Guest]: that actually what happens is the flea gets hungry and then bites humans.
[Guest]: That's the science behind plague transmission.
[Guest]: So the unfortunate saga of, in fact, rat migration is a sign of rat death, they're kind of helping
[Guest]: us by pointing out that, look, stay away, there's something wrong happening.
[Guest]: If rats are there, this is again, just a joke, but you know, if rats are there, it means
[Guest]: that there's no plague, if rats are surviving for a long period, that means there's no plague
[Guest]: and you know, you're relatively safe, but it's amazing the kind of stuff people did
[Guest]: with rats.
[Guest]: Eventually, the science came to be that once it was confirmed that rats were the source,
[Guest]: rat fleas were the source, rat catching became an occupation.
[Guest]: And even today, the Bombay municipality, I think it gives you 18 rupees for a rat or
[Guest]: something like that.
[Guest]: That's the going rate today.
[Guest]: But this whole occupation of rat catchers took on big time and you know, they were given
[Guest]: these incentives to catch rats, they were objections, for example, a gen said, you know,
[Guest]: this is against our religion, so you should not touch animals and so on.
[Guest]: So they would project upset, but the mechanism is very simple, they would keep these instruments,
[Guest]: these objects to catch rats, and they would lay these sort of poison sort of bread in
[Guest]: these cages.
[Guest]: And then the next day, they would have to report.
[Guest]: Now, once the rats come to the laboratory, imagine these scientists at you know, these
[Guest]: plague research laboratory, they're basically studying if these rats have plague or not,
[Guest]: because by then they discovered the germs that you know, lead to plague.
[Guest]: So all literally, I think there's something thousands of rats landing up at this laboratory
[Unknown]: every day.
[Guest]: Just imagine this economy, you know, of firstly paying people to catch rats, then somebody
[Guest]: analyzing the rats, then they built like a rat scorecard, they have a chart, you know,
[Guest]: how many rats are dying and so on.
[Guest]: And then you know, then they say that the and because plague was cyclical, you know,
[Guest]: why was it cyclical?
[Guest]: Because the rat flea could survive only in certain seasons of the year and it transmitted.
[Guest]: So in different parts of India, the cycle varied, but you could say that it became seasonal,
[Guest]: which meant that people could observe just like how we know the monsoon is coming and
[Guest]: going.
[Guest]: You could see over time when the plague is coming and then going, you know, which was
[Guest]: not known in 1897, 1898.
[Guest]: But by 1905, 1906, it became so seasonal, that this rat scorecard is very important
[Guest]: because the rat scorecard, you know, as it started tapering out, you knew that plague
[Guest]: is ebbing out.
[Guest]: So just like we look at this COVID chart numbers, and you know, now it's on the downward track
[Guest]: in India, the track, the number that they were seeing even more than human beings was
[Guest]: actually rats.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's completely crazy, because you've written a lot about this.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I won't quote all of it.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things I was struck by is how it was estimated, quote, that there were as
[Amit Varma]: many rats as humans in England and Wales, that is about 40 million.
[Amit Varma]: And using a similar ratio, 1 million rats were estimated to live in the city of Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which is just nuts.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens after this is, and by the way, what he was saying earlier about an incentive
[Amit Varma]: to catch rats, it strikes me was also an incentive to breed rats.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, was there ever a scam like that, where people were breeding rats?
[Guest]: There was.
[Guest]: There's a scam in Vietnam, for sure.
[Guest]: So we don't have evidence in India.
[Guest]: But I'm quite sure that you know, this economy, this is a classic perverse incentive kind
[Guest]: of problem.
[Guest]: But it did lead.
[Guest]: So there's a historian who's documented this in Vietnam, it's called the Hanoi rat catchers.
[Guest]: And you know, there's a whole economy which started on breeding rats so that you can,
[Guest]: you know, catch them.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, and also the directions in which it goes like one of the ways to get rid of rats
[Amit Varma]: is to have cats.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a dude called Andrew Buchanan, you write about who actually carries out a
[Amit Varma]: cat census.
[Amit Varma]: And then you write quote, in 1910, he staged demonstrations in a room with glass doors
[Amit Varma]: of how cats killed rats to create visual awareness.
[Amit Varma]: His enthusiasm was supported by luminaries such as Robert Koch and Eskita Sato.
[Amit Varma]: However, he found few takers for his proposals in India, and stringent opposition from a
[Amit Varma]: few scientists abroad who argued that cats themselves could harbor the plague.
[Amit Varma]: Some even argued that non venomous snakes were a better option since they did not attract
[Amit Varma]: rat fleas, stop quote, and I can imagine a home keeping, you know, non venomous snakes
[Amit Varma]: instead of cats for the rats.
[Amit Varma]: And then I found I love this para as well, quote, in the middle of this fascinating
[Amit Varma]: mammalian and reptilian debate, cats were introduced in plague prevention policies in
[Amit Varma]: British ruled Hong Kong, and in German ruled Togoland and Japan, a small business of cat
[Amit Varma]: rearing and trade also developed on the side.
[Amit Varma]: In 1909, Japan imported 4000 cats from the USA, and still noted a shortfall of 10,000
[Amit Varma]: felines.
[Amit Varma]: Cat breeds were compared on their efficiency in killing rats.
[Amit Varma]: In Japan, Kita Sato praised the rats sent to him by Buchanan as exquisite rat catchers
[Amit Varma]: and of a better race than the ones found there, stop quote, which is all of it is sort of
[Amit Varma]: completely nuts.
[Amit Varma]: And now, you know, before we move on to influenza, you speak about how the main legacy of the
[Amit Varma]: plague as such can be traced alongside, you know, four kind of different arcs, law, politics,
[Amit Varma]: labor and urban governance.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, can you elaborate on these for me, because it seems to a certain extent,
[Amit Varma]: the consequences of all of these, you know, good or bad are with us today.
[Guest]: Yeah, definitely.
[Guest]: I think if you ask me between cholera, plague and influenza, which has the greatest impact,
[Guest]: which still lives with us today, it's plague for so the legal aspect is the law, which
[Guest]: is called you know, this epidemics, Diseases Act of 1897.
[Guest]: I mean, COVID prevention today is under that act, right?
[Guest]: So that's the that's the real big legal kind of I mean, the legacy in terms of law comes
[Guest]: from that.
[Guest]: And interestingly, as I write about inheritance law, and so on, because so many people died
[Guest]: so quickly, that people had to start writing bills and so on.
[Guest]: And it gave a little fillip to that industry as well.
[Guest]: So that's the law part that is the architecture of countering pandemics in India, the legal
[Guest]: architecture was born out of this third global plague pandemic called plague pandemic of
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: So we start from 1896.
[Guest]: The other part is, you know, about political movements.
[Guest]: So one part is Tilak Gokhale, right?
[Guest]: So that's a huge part of Western Indian politics.
[Guest]: But then it's also about the cooperative movement, you know, the history of the cooperative movement.
[Guest]: So we talk about Amul today, and so on.
[Guest]: So there's some successful cooperatives, a lot of them have failed.
[Guest]: But interestingly, a lot of that organizational bandwidth, to run a successful cooperative,
[Guest]: you need to be able to get a lot of people for your cause.
[Guest]: So you need organizational skills, leadership skills.
[Guest]: And that came about often, in people handling these plague evacuation camps.
[Guest]: So imagine if you have to evacuate an entire village or an entire town again, and again,
[Guest]: certain kind of cater of people who kind of emerged in this system, who basically, you
[Guest]: know, were then the leaders of the first cooperatives of India, which were emerging in 1905, and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: So the Servants of India Society of Gokhale is a classic example of that, which were into
[Guest]: plague relief, and then became a big social work kind of society.
[Guest]: And then, you know, we mentioned the year of the plague, which was really 1907, one
[Guest]: million deaths, the worst year in Indian history from plague was the year of the Congress split.
[Guest]: And so that was, it's not the defining reason, you know, I'm not arguing that these epidemics
[Guest]: were the main reason, but an important factor, you know, the fact that how was the government
[Guest]: responding to this was a big deciding point between different factions of the International
[Guest]: Congress.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And then in Ahmedabad where I'm based, you know, Vallabhbhai Patel, Vallabhbhai Patel,
[Guest]: you know, the Sardar Patel's starting point in politics was really being this head of
[Guest]: the sanitation department of the Ahmedabad municipality.
[Guest]: And his first big job was in 1917, plague outbreak in Ahmedabad, Ahmedabad survived
[Guest]: plague until then, not no major outbreak, 1917, bad year for Ahmedabad, a lot of people
[Guest]: left Ahmedabad and Patel kind of went on the ground, tried to understand the situation.
[Guest]: So Patel's political career also, you know, kind of starts off with this, there's an economic
[Guest]: impact, you know, can't ignore the fact that economic activity is constrained, like, you
[Guest]: know, this year is a recession year.
[Guest]: Now think of a pandemic striking India from year to year, it's a kind of lesser known
[Guest]: part of economic history of India, that pandemics curtail India's growth story, you know, in
[Guest]: the 1980s, 90s, 1910s in a huge way.
[Guest]: And so I give examples, there are clear examples of GDP falling in some years by 5% and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: And so that kind of aggravates some of these other impacts, and business houses everywhere
[Guest]: are complaining, you know, they're saying we can't do business in epidemic times like
[Guest]: these.
[Guest]: Workers get some bargaining power, you know, this is the classic thing of epidemics, when
[Guest]: enough people die, the guys surviving can get good wages.
[Guest]: And so there's a labor shortage in many sectors, which drives up wages.
[Guest]: So that's one thing.
[Guest]: And then urban governance, which I've already alluded to, which is these improvement trusts.
[Guest]: So the roots of urban planning, urban, let's say urban development, really, you know, take
[Guest]: us back to the plague.
[Guest]: And so the Bombay Improvement Trust is really the first one.
[Guest]: That started in 1898, Mysore in 1903, Calcutta in 1911, Hyderabad, it happens literally a
[Guest]: few months after Hyderabad is knocked out.
[Guest]: And you know, literally, you cannot talk about the urban history of India.
[Guest]: Because so many cities of India, plague was a huge part of their history for at least
[Guest]: 20 years.
[Guest]: You know, in Hyderabad, you know, between 1911 and 1920s or so was continuously ravaged
[Guest]: by plague.
[Guest]: You know, Hyderabad's population collapsed completely.
[Guest]: We talk of the Moosi floods, you know, in Hyderabad, which for Hyderabadis, people know
[Guest]: about the Moosi floods, but actually the plague killed many more people than the Moosi floods.
[Guest]: But nobody remembers the plague as we do the Moosi floods.
[Guest]: And that's again, coming back to this point, that floods, earthquakes, big calamities,
[Guest]: are better remembered than epidemics, because epidemics are not destroying, you know, capital
[Guest]: stock and so on.
[Guest]: So this is how I see the legacy of the plague on politics.
[Guest]: So you know, it's interesting, if you see the full arc of Indian freedom movement, the
[Guest]: way I'm looking at it now is cholera and 1857 uprising, plague and the rise of the Congress,
[Guest]: and influenza and the rise of Gandhi.
[Guest]: And so three major sort of markers in our freedom movement can be pinned against the
[Guest]: backdrop of, you know, a major pandemic.
[Amit Varma]: And Mahatma Gandhi also kind of plays a side role even in plague hitting South Africa,
[Amit Varma]: because as you point out, when he's in South Africa, you know, that sort of slogan of his
[Amit Varma]: cleanliness is next only to godliness, perhaps has something to do with that.
[Amit Varma]: And you also talk about how because South Africans, white South Africans would blame
[Amit Varma]: outsiders for this, in a sense, it was also a contributing factor to apartheid.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, that's definitely the case, you know, we've talked so far about plague in India.
[Guest]: But plague, when we said the pandemic, it really reached many parts of the world.
[Guest]: It didn't kill many people.
[Guest]: You know, the estimates I've put until 1920, 13 million deaths, 12 million in India.
[Guest]: But there were 1 million deaths outside India, a lot of it in China.
[Guest]: But South Africa got hit.
[Guest]: Brazil got a little bit of plague, not too many deaths, but a huge scare.
[Guest]: Some parts of Europe, Indonesia got a lot of plague.
[Guest]: And in South Africa, there's no doubt that, you know, it contributed, it's not the main
[Guest]: factor, but it contributed towards these very strict segregation policies that started.
[Guest]: Because like with cholera, plague was associated with filth and dirt.
[Guest]: So how do we keep plague away from us?
[Guest]: Don't let these people who carry plague come near us.
[Guest]: And so segregation policies were, you know, very strongly put into place in South Africa.
[Guest]: So you know, so as a historian has noted on plague, Myron Eschenberg, who's written a
[Guest]: book on plague, he says it contributed to the rise of nationalism in India, the great
[Guest]: fire in Honolulu, which is, you know, in Hawaii, the persistence of anti-Asian prejudice in
[Guest]: the U.S.
[Guest]: So one of the, though it didn't hit the U.S., their immigration laws became extremely racist
[Guest]: after 1905, precisely because they associated with immigration the disease.
[Guest]: And so that's how this anti-China, anti-Indian sentiments rose, the rise of apartheid in
[Guest]: South Africa, and the growth of public health service in Brazil.
[Guest]: Interestingly, Brazil, one of the leading scientists in the world, you know, was appointed
[Guest]: at a very young age to be their public health expert.
[Guest]: And he did a great job.
[Guest]: He created, people say he's a, you know, the pioneer of public health in Brazil.
[Guest]: And I'm pointing this out because Brazil today is on, you know, one spectrum with the government
[Guest]: of Brazil is on this, literally an anti-science spectrum.
[Guest]: If you plot the governments of the world today, Brazil is on one end where the president of
[Guest]: Brazil continuously says, you know, that this is not even a virus, it can't do any harm,
[Guest]: and taking blatantly sort of anti-scientific positions.
[Guest]: And more than 100 years back, it was the Brazilian government who got in the best scientist possible
[Guest]: to handle the outbreak.
[Guest]: It just shows you, you know, how things have changed for Brazil over that 100 year period.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's great.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to talking about influenza now, where, you know, the way it strikes seems
[Amit Varma]: to be like much more dramatic, like you have a quote at the start of your chapter from
[Amit Varma]: the famous preliminary report on the influenza pandemic of 1918 in India, which is a report
[Amit Varma]: from which that 6 million figure comes, as you point out later, and this quote goes,
[Amit Varma]: quote, the hospitals were choked so that it was impossible to remove the dead quickly
[Amit Varma]: enough to make room for the dying.
[Amit Varma]: The streets and lanes of the cities were littered with dead and dying people.
[Amit Varma]: The postal and telegraph services were completely disorganized.
[Amit Varma]: The train service continued, but at all the principal stations, dead and dying people
[Amit Varma]: were being removed from the trains.
[Amit Varma]: The burning hearts and burial grounds were literally swamped with corpses, while an even
[Amit Varma]: greater number of waited removal.
[Amit Varma]: The depleted medical service itself, sorely stricken by the epidemic, was incapable of
[Amit Varma]: dealing with more than just a minute fraction of the sickness requiring attention.
[Amit Varma]: Nearly every household was lamenting a death and everywhere terror and confusion, rain,
[Amit Varma]: stop code and a stark picture.
[Amit Varma]: And also for if any of my writing students are listening to this an excellent use of
[Amit Varma]: semicolons like they work much better than full stops here in terms of the accumulation
[Amit Varma]: of effects and the impact that they have on you.
[Amit Varma]: And while these are sort of general and abstract, you know, the writer Suryakant Tripathi, also
[Amit Varma]: known as Nirala, wrote about how, quote, my family disappeared in the blink of an eye.
[Amit Varma]: In whichever direction I turned, I saw darkness, stop quotes.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about influenza, you know, how people react to it.
[Amit Varma]: What are the theories at the time that hey, what is causing this, which as you point out
[Amit Varma]: till eight decades, we didn't know for sure what was causing it.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that like?
[Amit Varma]: Because by now, this is no longer like cholera, which is spreading slowly in a country where
[Amit Varma]: the railways aren't there and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: This is just weeping through populations.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Firstly, because, you know, this idea of flu, most people think of it as a cold, right?
[Guest]: And the common cold is also part of this what they call is run up, you know, rhino viruses
[Guest]: as they're called.
[Guest]: But the flu comes from influenza.
[Guest]: They had people heard of influenza in 1918.
[Guest]: Yes, because there was something called as a 1890 influenza pandemic.
[Guest]: So the 1918 was not the first one.
[Guest]: In fact, historians kind of note down many pandemics, but they were not as leaded as
[Guest]: the 1918 one.
[Guest]: And in Indian medical circles, they were aware of what had happened in 1890.
[Guest]: And it was called Nahi Sardhi Bukhaar, you know.
[Guest]: So when it had first come, it was Nahi Sardhi Bukhaar.
[Guest]: So the difference between influenza and the other two diseases, cholera and plague, is
[Guest]: that it's not as glamorous.
[Guest]: And that's because you don't have to go to the toilet or, you know, you don't have to
[Guest]: eat nothing.
[Guest]: Boils don't come on your body.
[Guest]: You just get a fever and some chills and so on.
[Guest]: The reigning medical knowledge at that time was bacteriology.
[Guest]: In fact, virology was not even, you know, nobody knew about what are viruses and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: And so people thought that influenza is called by something called Pfeiffer's bacillus, Pfeiffer
[Guest]: being the name of a scientist and bacillus being bacteria.
[Guest]: And this was 1893, I think, is when he kind of noted this.
[Guest]: And so 1918, the medical establishment thought that this is just another strain of Pfeiffer's
[Guest]: bacillus.
[Guest]: And so all the vaccination efforts, which did take place, but they were completely futile,
[Guest]: was on the basis of thinking that the flu is nothing but bacteria.
[Guest]: So it's as, so it was, they got that quite wrong, you know, in the sense, it's like saying
[Guest]: coronavirus today is not actually a virus.
[Guest]: 50 years later, somebody says that it's actually not a virus, it was something else.
[Guest]: So that's what people are working with the premise that it was bacteria, but it was not,
[Guest]: it was a virus.
[Guest]: So that was one big unknown, right?
[Guest]: And that's why nobody really knew how to deal with this.
[Guest]: 1918 influenza, the virulence was kind of unprecedented.
[Guest]: Most people would say it has never happened since then also.
[Guest]: It spread so quickly around the world, it, you know, it reached villages in remote Alaska,
[Guest]: you know, it reached like, you know, islands in Pacific Ocean.
[Guest]: Just some human contact was enough, but you required human contact, you know, and that
[Guest]: is why the scientist Fred Hoyle, who's a famous astrophysicist, he, in fact, pointed out that
[Guest]: how can it be so viral, you know, so he argued much later, many decades later, that this
[Guest]: had to do with some sort of a meteoric dispersion, that some meteor was coming from outer space
[Guest]: and think of it dispersing the virus or the, you know, and that by then they knew it as
[Guest]: a virus across the world, right?
[Guest]: But we have evidence of influenza not touching certain islands of the world, and it's precisely
[Guest]: where no ships landed there, right?
[Guest]: So it's precisely in those islands, which said, we are not going to take any ships coming
[Guest]: in, which got that early warning notice, which completely escaped influenza.
[Guest]: So there were literally a few parts of the world, which, you know, were without influenza
[Guest]: at all.
[Guest]: It was not only virulent, it was lethal, right?
[Guest]: And so case fatality rates varied around the world.
[Guest]: In India, it was unusually high, but typically in the range of, you know, three to 5%, which
[Guest]: is very high combined with that virulence, and it devastated, you know, half a million
[Guest]: deaths in the US back then, literally hundreds of thousands of deaths in Europe.
[Guest]: The context is also important.
[Guest]: It came during World War I, right?
[Guest]: And it eventually killed many more people than the war itself.
[Guest]: So the war ends in November 1918, but the bulk of the influenza deaths happened between
[Guest]: September 1918, let's say August 1918, and December 19.
[Guest]: So this is really a pandemic, which lasts for three months, though most people today
[Guest]: classify that from 1918 to 1920.
[Guest]: And that's why this book's title also takes 1920 as the end.
[Guest]: But most of the deaths happened in a two or three month window, that is September, October,
[Guest]: November of 1918.
[Guest]: Where did it start?
[Guest]: It's a, it's still a mystery.
[Guest]: Most people would call it, you know, we'll say America and Kansas.
[Guest]: That's what the reigning theory suggests.
[Guest]: But it's famously called as the Spanish flu, nothing to do with Spain.
[Guest]: It's just the fact that, you know, Spain happened to be neutral in World War I.
[Guest]: And so it had, its press was reporting about the disease, and so more people heard about
[Guest]: the flu in Spain.
[Guest]: And that's how it earned the world, I mean, it's a complete misnomer, Spanish, it should
[Guest]: actually be called the American flu, if you want to call it, you know, a particular name.
[Guest]: It's more accurate to call it an American flu.
[Guest]: But we now know it as the Spanish flu.
[Guest]: And of course, one should not, I call it the influenza of 1918.
[Guest]: I don't think we should be giving, you know, geographic descriptors to diseases.
[Guest]: It comes to India, and it's in two waves, okay, it comes in two waves, and the first
[Guest]: wave is mild, the second wave is devastating.
[Guest]: And interestingly, it kills off people in the working age group.
[Guest]: So unlike COVID, which is, you know, high mortality among the old people, or even plague,
[Guest]: which also killed a lot of infants, apart from working age people, influenza had this
[Guest]: unique W shaped signature, it killed off a lot of very young people, then its mortality
[Guest]: impact was lesser in the 10 to 20 age group, 20 to 40 age group, it really sparked up,
[Guest]: then it kind of went down.
[Guest]: So if you see this mortality across age groups, it was W shaped.
[Guest]: And that's the signature of the virus, because that W shape was observed around the world.
[Guest]: And so a lot of theory as to why the scientific theory as to why it happened.
[Guest]: And what do you do, it really attacked your lungs.
[Guest]: So influenza was also directly linked with pneumonia, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, it attacked, and then, you know, the kind of pneumonia took over and
[Guest]: kind of destroyed your body.
[Guest]: And so literally, people's lungs would fill up with fluids, it would, one way to think
[Guest]: about influenza death is your lungs completely giving way.
[Guest]: And so many of these deaths, eventually, people have turned blue and so on, like cholera,
[Guest]: but for a different reason.
[Guest]: So that's the ghastly nature of influenza.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, it's a flu and even flus are not supposed to be so lethal.
[Guest]: But this particular strain was, and, you know, we can talk about why it was so devastating
[Guest]: in India and so on.
[Guest]: But the mortality estimates, at that time, globally, were placed at about 20 million.
[Guest]: That number has been revised upwards, and only upwards since then.
[Guest]: And the most, I would say the best estimates put it at about 40 million worldwide.
[Guest]: We still don't know the exact numbers for China in terms of mortality.
[Guest]: So that's a big blind spot.
[Guest]: But there's some papers which say 50 million plus, you know, and so on.
[Guest]: I think there's only one paper recently, which is putting down the number but 40 million
[Guest]: is the go-to number now, global deaths due to influenza pandemic.
[Guest]: And I argue in this book, I've taken up the estimate for India, in a way back to 20 million.
[Guest]: You know, Kingsley Davis was a demographer, he kind of backed up the envelope calculation,
[Guest]: he said 20 million in 1951.
[Guest]: Then that number was brought down.
[Guest]: So in 1918, when this report came out, called the preliminary report, the number, you know,
[Guest]: Norman White, the health commissioner of that time gave was 65 to 6 million.
[Guest]: This was only British India, so not princely states.
[Guest]: So if you added, say, 1 million to that, you get maybe 7 million.
[Guest]: It's really the census of India, you know, when they enumerated the census in 1921, that
[Guest]: really the enormity of loss stood out.
[Guest]: Because the census officials said, look, it was not 5 to 6 million, because that is not
[Guest]: the number we're getting.
[Guest]: Because when they went to the villages, they found villages just decimated.
[Guest]: So it's interesting that it's about two or three years after the event, that actually
[Guest]: the enormity of loss came in.
[Guest]: Because remember, how do you even get this information on loss?
[Guest]: You know, you have to have a newspaper system, you need to have news agencies.
[Guest]: The point is, even those guys died.
[Guest]: Even reporters died.
[Guest]: So it was not really covered as an event.
[Guest]: It got covered only when the census officials went and said, how many guys are there in
[Guest]: the village?
[Guest]: And you compare it with the previous census, and then you find a staggering gap.
[Guest]: And so how do you explain this gap?
[Guest]: Is it because of influenza or plague or other reasons?
[Guest]: So there are certain methods to discern this, but there's no doubt that the influenza had
[Guest]: a huge impact.
[Guest]: And so the numbers, the estimates range between, I would say, 14 million.
[Guest]: Siddharth Chandra has an estimate of 14 to 15 million.
[Guest]: And I basically put it upwards more, because I found that actually mortality was much higher
[Guest]: in Hyderabad state and Rajasthan.
[Guest]: And that has never been accounted for till now.
[Guest]: So this is my research claiming high mortality for these states.
[Guest]: And so now the number is about 20 million for India.
[Guest]: So these are my estimates for the mortality.
[Amit Varma]: And what is absolutely nuts about all of this is, you know, we are thinking of 2020 as this
[Amit Varma]: horrendous year.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost a meme that somebody dies and, you know, people will tweet, oh no, 2020,
[Amit Varma]: when will it get over?
[Amit Varma]: But you know, 1917 and 1918 were almost like a perfect storm of horrendous events.
[Amit Varma]: Like, as you pointed out in the book, a quote, India went from being abnormally wet in 1917,
[Amit Varma]: suitable conditions from malaria and plague, to being abnormally dry in 1980, in a classic
[Amit Varma]: condition for famine.
[Amit Varma]: So you've got malaria, you've got plague, you've got famine, you've got influenza hitting
[Amit Varma]: and killing 20 million people, plus you have all the political discontent, the Rollit Act,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Jallianwala Bagh, it's all kind of going to hell.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, and in a sense, it's therefore, you know, not that surprising that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: with all those glamorous events happening, the influenza has kind of been sort of overlooked.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll come back to that.
[Amit Varma]: I was also struck by one thing here, like one, of course, the common theme in all these
[Amit Varma]: pandemics, including the current one, is the essential state failure, like you quote the
[Amit Varma]: historian Mridula Raman Nair saying, quote, confusion and inconsistency seem to have marked
[Amit Varma]: the response of the authorities throughout the presidency.
[Amit Varma]: But what was heartening then, and is similar now, in a sense, is the response of civil
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you write about how, quote, there were appeals in newspapers to send people from
[Amit Varma]: voluntary service organizations in Bombay City to affected rural areas.
[Amit Varma]: These organizations would emerge as a saving grace of the pandemic across India.
[Amit Varma]: And then later, you write, quote, in Bombay City, the organizations aiding in this effort
[Amit Varma]: were an eclectic mix of the Hindu Medical Association, the Social Service League led
[Amit Varma]: by NM Joshi and its Influenza Relief Committee, community based hospitals for the Jains, Lohanas,
[Amit Varma]: Marwaris, Boras and Parsis, St. George's Nursing Association, Young Men's Mohammedan Association,
[Amit Varma]: Bombay Humanitarian League, Telugu Free Library, Japanese and Shanghai Peace Goods Association,
[Amit Varma]: and dozens of others.
[Amit Varma]: They distributed food, medicines, and often ran traveling dispensaries, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Almost like, you know, a secular uprising of the people helping each other in times
[Amit Varma]: of need when the state has failed, somewhat similar to what even happened here during
[Amit Varma]: the migrant crisis or during the lockdown in general, where it was civil service groups
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi and in Mumbai who fed so many thousands of people and help them out and help them
[Amit Varma]: get home.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that, what's your take on sort of this aspect of what was going on?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, is it something that we only noticed during a pandemic that only comes
[Amit Varma]: up in these times of emergency and otherwise we chill out and most of us we are like, hey,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the government is there to do all this is not my work.
[Amit Varma]: But suddenly when there's a major sort of tragedy like this, and you realize the state
[Amit Varma]: can't handle it, then you go out and get the job done yourself.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, you know, it's a big question.
[Guest]: I think state failure is obviously an obvious prompt for civil society to wake up.
[Guest]: But I think there are many aspects of state failure, where civil society does not respond
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: But pandemics, as you rightly pointed out, precisely because it affects all of us collectively,
[Guest]: and we're all in it together.
[Guest]: That is what kind of gets it, you know, much more prominence.
[Guest]: And so, like you said, like, you know, like this year, 1918 was unprecedented in the amount
[Guest]: of outpouring.
[Guest]: I mean, literally everyone was in it to help others, because you could see I mean, if you
[Guest]: want to think of like, you know, some of these zombie movies of people walking around dead
[Guest]: people walking or people falling off dead, something like that.
[Guest]: I mean, when you say 20 million people dying in a few months, this is literally like that,
[Guest]: you know, first quotes of the book of this chapter says people literally getting off
[Guest]: railway stations and their dead bodies around.
[Guest]: And people dying on the streets, you know, it's that horrific.
[Guest]: And so there are two possible responses.
[Guest]: People go back into their houses and say, I'm not going to come out, or actually basically
[Guest]: try and help others in certain ways.
[Guest]: So the Mysore government, for example, you know, they started these dispensaries, they
[Guest]: would have this unique medical system, the doctors would go to houses, take a note of
[Guest]: what are you eating?
[Guest]: What is your diet?
[Guest]: And they had some basic prescription, because what they realized was, with some amount of
[Guest]: nutrition, you could sail through it.
[Guest]: As long as you're well nourished, you could get through the flu.
[Guest]: But if you are not that well nourished, the mortality rates were just, you know, an absolute
[Guest]: killer.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of realization that people, you know, found out.
[Guest]: And what it meant was that you could then, as an individual cut down mortality, not based
[Guest]: on science, but just based on a reasoning, that when you saw, you know, a person get
[Guest]: the influenza, it caused some pain, but the person didn't die, right.
[Guest]: But when the person was not that well nourished, the person was dying.
[Guest]: And that sort of idea that we need to get basic food and water out there, you know,
[Guest]: a massive response.
[Guest]: And so the public health commissioner, a guy called Norman White, as I say, he would later
[Guest]: sarcastically quip that the outpouring of support in large numbers from the educated
[Guest]: towards the poor, in times of distress was unprecedented, perhaps in the history of India.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, he uses his words to say that this was an interesting episode, where
[Guest]: the rich actually cared for the poor, right.
[Guest]: And you know, it was truly a remarkable effort.
[Guest]: Was it successful?
[Guest]: All we can say that it must have prevented, you know, millions of more deaths.
[Guest]: So it must have helped stop it.
[Guest]: It was really herd immunity, which kind of stopped it eventually, right, in the sense
[Guest]: it just ripped through the population.
[Guest]: And it's still a bit of a mystery as to how it goes out.
[Guest]: Maybe it mutates to lesser forms, or was it, you know, complete herd immunity.
[Guest]: But whatever it is, the loss was just immense.
[Guest]: And as Alfred Crosby, the historian says, the single largest demographic shock ever
[Guest]: received to the human species, you know, so when we say 40 million people dying in a few
[Guest]: months globally, and in that India being 20 million, this was a shock of like no other.
[Guest]: You know, there's an oral history, Dr. Yogesh Kulkarni, who I cite in the book, who was
[Guest]: on COVID duty this year, he asked in his village in, you know, Vidarbha region, rural Vidarbha,
[Guest]: saying, you know, are there instances of this in the past?
[Guest]: And interestingly, the memory lingered on, you know, of influenza.
[Guest]: And this particular tribal leader from the Adivasi leader from the Gond tribe, stepped
[Guest]: up and said, you know, my father in our family, they tell us the story of a time when so many
[Guest]: people died, that a person had to be given alcohol to drive the bullock cart to dispose
[Guest]: of all the bodies.
[Guest]: You know, and just the sight of bodies stacking up is one of the defining images of influenza
[Guest]: at this time.
[Guest]: You know, Nirala talks about the Ganga being stacked with corpses, oral histories pointing
[Guest]: out to bodies being thrown off the cliff, really staggering number of deaths, you know,
[Guest]: which which took place out here.
[Guest]: And one of these, the sub stories of this is that it kind of came on the back of a drought,
[Guest]: you know, and so that was an important part of the story, that the drought had led to
[Guest]: a lot of under nutrition, which can influence action.
[Amit Varma]: And there's also sort of the an unintended consequences or an unseen effect, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: at one point, you write and this is from bodies piling up, and at one point, you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: in the hilly areas of Kumao, corpses were thrown into the jungle.
[Amit Varma]: And according to the writer, Jim Corbett, led to leopards developing a taste for human
[Amit Varma]: flesh, and thus being labeled man eaters, stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, to think that we blame leopards and pass judgment on them, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's not their fault what are they to do a similar unintended consequences that you know,
[Amit Varma]: you point out how Godrej move like Godrej was founded in 1897 to make security equipment.
[Amit Varma]: And in 1918, they moved to manufacturing washing soap bars, which is a classic example of incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of now, you know, before we move on to a final section, and we'll keep it brief,
[Amit Varma]: because I know I've held you long enough.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to sort of the aftermath and the consequences of, you know, the influenza
[Amit Varma]: pandemic over here, because as you point out, it's not just a debt toll.
[Amit Varma]: You know, at one point, you say it is possible that in 1918, 40 to 60% of the Indian population
[Amit Varma]: contracted the flu.
[Amit Varma]: This has consequences even on those who survive.
[Amit Varma]: You estimate that the GDP that year, you know, went down by 10%.
[Amit Varma]: And all kinds of things are happening.
[Amit Varma]: Because more women than men are dying, the birth rates also go down.
[Amit Varma]: And all kinds of shit is playing out over the long term, there's a supply side shock.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when it comes to labor supply, there's a demographic impact, all of these things
[Amit Varma]: are happening.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about what these kind of impacts of that particular pandemic were.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, the economic loss was massive.
[Guest]: Yeah, partly because the drought, but also because simply, this is the classic supply
[Guest]: side shock, as economists would call it, that simply there are no people and hence there's
[Guest]: no production.
[Guest]: You know, and so we say the GDP fell by about 10%.
[Guest]: It's in fact instructive, right, that in India's recorded macroeconomic history from 1901 to
[Guest]: now, the two years in which India saw a negative 10% kind of fall were both pandemic years.
[Guest]: And that's why I feel, you know, economic students, who often know a lot about what
[Guest]: the Great Depression did to the US economy, should be taught in India about what pandemics
[Guest]: can do to your economy, because they've had such a big importance in Indian history.
[Guest]: So you know, agricultural yields fell that particular year.
[Guest]: The big impact was on labor, you know, and what a big argument I make in this book is
[Guest]: that influenza gave birth to India's labor movement in a big way, right.
[Guest]: And I use this, I show this using, you know, the spike in articles on, like, if you look
[Guest]: at the Times of India database, the number of times the word unions or labor is kind
[Guest]: of mentioned, spikes up dramatically after influenza.
[Guest]: And there are tons of documents from the Royal Labor Commission, a variety of sources, which
[Guest]: tell you it's that particular three months, which changed the game for labor, simply because
[Guest]: if you don't have 20 million people, what are, you know, people who are going to employ
[Guest]: these people, they get tremendous.
[Guest]: So the guys who were left behind, get tremendous bargaining power.
[Guest]: And so wage rates start going up.
[Guest]: So some amount of labor, the conditions of labor tend to improve.
[Guest]: But more important for the freedom movement.
[Guest]: These guys now see, of course, I mean, influenza is a rallying point, you see so many people
[Guest]: dying.
[Guest]: It's very clear that the British are not the so called benevolent rulers, there is massive
[Guest]: calamity, which has happened, and there's a lot of opposition to the British that's
[Guest]: coming out of this.
[Guest]: And then, of course, you know, stuff like Jallianwala Malabar tragedy, and so on.
[Guest]: So that's, you know, a huge part of the story.
[Guest]: The idea that public health, I mean, it was, you know, the leading official in health Norman
[Guest]: White at that time, they were called the sanitary commissioners of India, you know, it's after
[Guest]: influenza that they call it the public health commissioners of India.
[Guest]: So the word public health itself comes into our consciousness, really, thanks to influenza,
[Guest]: you know, there's some improvement, not much improvement, but there's some improvement
[Guest]: in the uptake of medical colleges, because people realize that when wherever there was
[Guest]: some amount of medical facilities offered, people could survive the flu.
[Guest]: And so one obvious, you know, counterpoint was that if you increase medical facilities,
[Guest]: then it would be good.
[Guest]: It did not get so much international opinion, or, you know, criticism, like the Bengals
[Guest]: for example, much later, but the Americans, you know, I mentioned there's a, even in the
[Guest]: American politics, people are pointing out to what's happening in India, saying how can
[Guest]: so many people be allowed to die at that point.
[Guest]: So emphasis on public health slowly sort of improves, the labor movement starts off in
[Guest]: a big way.
[Guest]: Again, like the cooperative movement and plague, the cooperative movement also starts rising.
[Guest]: But the biggest impact is that the death rate of India finally starts falling.
[Guest]: And that's why influenza bookends India's, you can say millennia worth of, you know,
[Guest]: mass mortality.
[Guest]: And 1920 is when the death rate starts falling.
[Guest]: And that's two reasons.
[Guest]: One is both, all three, cholera, plague, and influenza start ebbing, you know, because
[Guest]: there's better understanding of cholera and plague, and influenza is kind of a one-off.
[Guest]: But influenza kills off so many people who would have otherwise died of cholera and plague
[Guest]: in the next years, right?
[Guest]: So in a strange way, it kind of knocks out so many people, but the people who are left
[Guest]: there then, kind of surviving or living for longer time periods.
[Guest]: So India's demographic transition begins at the end of influenza.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because once death rates start falling, over time, birth rates start falling, and that's
[Guest]: when India's population growth really starts to grow.
[Guest]: So you know, how we became a billion people, I mean, throughout history, we had high death
[Guest]: rates and high birth rates.
[Guest]: And our population fluctuated between most estimates between 100 and 200 million people.
[Guest]: It's only after influenza that actually death rates started falling substantially.
[Guest]: And the Indian population started growing steadily, you know, from 300 to 400 to 500.
[Guest]: And today, we are 1.2 billion people.
[Guest]: So India's falling death rates, really, that journey starts off from the end of influenza.
[Guest]: And so that's why it marks the end of an epoch of mass mortality.
[Amit Varma]: I like the way you point out that if they hadn't died of influenza, they would have
[Amit Varma]: died of cholera or the plague, you know, if one guy doesn't get you, the other guy will.
[Amit Varma]: So where are you going to run?
[Amit Varma]: So we are indeed, you know, those of us who are still here in 2020, so incredibly fortunate
[Amit Varma]: that we just have, you know, two enemies to contend with two dangers to ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: One is COVID-19.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is the flailing state.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my next question is sort of, you know, you have a chapter at the end where you look
[Amit Varma]: at COVID through the rearview mirror, you look at the lessons of the past for COVID.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that you point out is about the incentives of politicians, about
[Amit Varma]: how what we see nowadays is that politicians actually have an incentive to downplay pandemic
[Amit Varma]: deaths.
[Amit Varma]: And they can do this by underreporting them or they can, you know, file something under
[Amit Varma]: pneumonia, or they could simply not test.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, Donald Trump famously said that one way of getting the COVID numbers
[Amit Varma]: down is, you know, test a little bit less than the logic there is, of course, impeccable,
[Amit Varma]: except that he was making it explicit.
[Amit Varma]: And these incentives work on all politicians.
[Amit Varma]: So one, you know, there is this because I think one of the truths that modern politicians
[Amit Varma]: have figured out that to a large extent, governance doesn't matter, narratives do.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, if you go to the extreme, then governance will also matter if people
[Amit Varma]: are dying in the streets.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, it is really the narratives that matter and your incentive is towards,
[Amit Varma]: you know, looking after the narrative and not actually doing anything about the problem.
[Amit Varma]: Quite often, it will come from denying the problem.
[Amit Varma]: And another aspect of this is in, you know, the tail end risk, for example, you point
[Amit Varma]: out that, you know, all of these things are foreseeable, you know, Bill Gates famously
[Amit Varma]: said, you know, five years ago that the next pandemic is going to be vicious.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that a politician's incentive will always be to downplay the tail risk,
[Amit Varma]: because your bandwidth is limited, there are only so many things you can do and talk about.
[Amit Varma]: So if something is an extremely low probability event with extremely high costs, despite the
[Amit Varma]: high cost, the probability is so low that you're best off ignoring it.
[Amit Varma]: And when people do talk about, you know, tail risk, such as, you know, every time there
[Amit Varma]: is the warning of a pandemic, which doesn't quite become a pandemic, like bird flu or
[Amit Varma]: swine flu or whatever, then, you know, it seems like what was a fuss all about and wasn't
[Amit Varma]: that a false alarm.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one then think about the incentives of politicians, like I completely get your
[Amit Varma]: point that collective memory is important, that is, in fact, what helped, you know, Southeast
[Amit Varma]: Asia deal with this current pandemic, because they've been through those previous scares,
[Amit Varma]: and they kind of got their act together, you know, Kerala dealt with Nipah, which is why
[Amit Varma]: they were a little more efficient here.
[Amit Varma]: But having said all of that, it's also true that, you know, the incentives of politicians
[Amit Varma]: are in a different direction, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: I think, you know, politicians have to claim, you know, that they're doing a good job.
[Guest]: That's the basic objective of every politician, whether it's Trump or, you know, any any politician
[Guest]: going to try and sell this idea that we're doing a great job.
[Guest]: Now, can we objectively say that somebody is doing a great job?
[Guest]: What I say in the book is actually no.
[Guest]: What we can objectively say if somebody is not doing a great job, you know, it's asymmetric
[Guest]: in the sense that if, you know, Pakistan has very few deaths and, you know, the economy
[Guest]: is not tanked as much as in India, you know, does that mean Pakistan has managed it much
[Guest]: better?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But I can definitely say that US has managed it badly, because they've got, you know, deaths
[Guest]: per capita is fairly high on the global spectrum and so on.
[Guest]: So the way I'm looking at this is, you know, don't celebrate people like New Zealand is
[Guest]: the classic poster child right now of good pandemic management.
[Guest]: I would say don't do that.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think New Zealand has done a great or bad job.
[Guest]: All we can say is that some countries have messed up big time.
[Guest]: And US is probably the classic case of that.
[Guest]: India is, I mean, not really.
[Guest]: If you look at any objective measure, it's not that bad.
[Guest]: But in our neighborhood, we are the worst.
[Guest]: That we can say for sure.
[Guest]: So the politics of pandemics is, you know, first is how much to intervene?
[Guest]: You know, that's the big question.
[Guest]: How much should be locked on?
[Guest]: And the decision we took, for example, was on this probability that, you know, suppose
[Guest]: it goes out of hand, then the loss will be too much for us.
[Guest]: Now in hindsight, of course, maybe some would say it was too harsh.
[Guest]: It was definitely not well thought out because we got a migration crisis unnecessary out
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: But I think this is this tension between economics and epidemiology, which is also there in this
[Guest]: age of pandemics, kind of replayed very classically this year.
[Guest]: Interestingly, there's already a research study which shows countries which are closer
[Guest]: to elections, you know, did not intervene that much.
[Guest]: So U.S. had an election this year, and they did not do much.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because the economic losses are so massive, right, that it will basically hurt your electoral
[Guest]: prospects.
[Guest]: So that's one theory, that is, countries which were closer to election actually did not intervene
[Guest]: that much.
[Guest]: So that's one way to look at it.
[Guest]: On a more grand scale, of course, you know, between the last age and this age of pandemics,
[Guest]: that time there were imperial powers and Britain did not really invest as much in public health
[Guest]: to control cholera in India vis-a-vis with what they were doing in Britain.
[Guest]: So obviously democracies help.
[Guest]: So that's a working hypothesis, that democracies are going to be better off at understanding
[Guest]: pandemics because the information base will hopefully be more timely and so on.
[Guest]: In any case, the death reporting hopefully is much better.
[Guest]: Like today, if you ask me how many people died of, you know, COVID in China, I don't
[Unknown]: know what is the number.
[Guest]: You know, there's a stated number, but nobody really knows what is the actual number in
[Guest]: Iran.
[Guest]: But you can be quite sure of the numbers in the US, in many of the other countries.
[Guest]: And so that's one thing that, you know, democracy really gives well.
[Guest]: The other thing about pandemics, as I said, is about this, the regional variation of deaths.
[Guest]: And we saw that very starkly in India, you know, every now and then.
[Guest]: So Kerala was this model.
[Guest]: Then even today, Kerala is leading on the most indicators of COVID deaths and so on.
[Guest]: But it's changed, you know, from what Kerala was six months back to now, things have slightly
[Guest]: changed in the pecking order.
[Guest]: And what pandemic history tells you is that this will happen, you know, at some point,
[Guest]: some regions will have more deaths, some other regions will have more.
[Guest]: There'll be some reasons which science will tell us, you know, five years down the line
[Guest]: as to why COVID mortality was much higher in some parts of the world than others.
[Guest]: And so what the kind of inference I'm taking as a starting off is, is that good pandemic
[Guest]: management, you know, the state has an important role to play.
[Guest]: But there are a variety of other factors, right, including the disease, you know, etiology
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Just like why, you know, plague hit Bombay and Punjab, but not so much Eastern and Southern
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: It didn't really have much to do, it had more to do with the nature of the rats and fleas.
[Guest]: And so there is this role of the disease itself, the unique characteristics of the disease
[Guest]: itself, and the impact it's having.
[Guest]: And politicians, of course, will always try and, as I say, compare losses with somebody
[Guest]: doing worse than them, right.
[Guest]: And so that's why in India, we're comparing ourselves with US.
[Guest]: If we compare ourselves with other countries in South Asia, we are the worst off.
[Guest]: So this sort of, who are you comparing against is, you know, every politician sort of choice
[Guest]: to make.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you know, one of the heartening things at least is how far the science has
[Amit Varma]: progressed and not in an incremental way, but almost exponentially in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when influenza hit in 1918, you know, people promised that there'll be a vaccine
[Amit Varma]: soon and they only started work on a vaccine in the 1940s.
[Amit Varma]: And regardless, while they found vaccines for other kinds of the flu, there's never
[Amit Varma]: been a vaccine for the coronavirus before this.
[Amit Varma]: I remember, you know, epidemiologists saying this year that there may never be a vaccine
[Amit Varma]: for COVID-19 because while, you know, there have been other flu vaccines, nothing for
[Amit Varma]: a coronavirus, look how long the HIV vaccine has been in the making, yet here we are.
[Amit Varma]: And this is like, so incredibly remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: Now that your book is out, and now that we've kind of discussed some of the lessons in terms
[Amit Varma]: of governance and the way people react and the importance of collective memory and all
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: But the other factor in this is, of course, the science, which is advancing massively.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, nevertheless, it could be said that, you know, viruses and bacteria have
[Amit Varma]: always kind of had the upper hand against us, if not colonized us entirely, in a much
[Amit Varma]: deeper way than the British could manage.
[Amit Varma]: So when you kind of look at the future, you know, when the next pandemic comes, will we
[Amit Varma]: have learned the lessons of this one?
[Amit Varma]: You know, is there a sort of given everybody's incentives and the imperatives?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a classic road it'll go down on?
[Amit Varma]: Like at one point, you talk about the stages of a pandemic and the, you know, the way you
[Amit Varma]: have classified it is between denial, confusion, acceptance, and erasure, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I found quite enlightening in light of all that you write in the book and in light of
[Amit Varma]: all that sort of happened in this year.
[Amit Varma]: So do you think that we'll at some point, you know, learn from the past and nail the
[Amit Varma]: correct response to something like this?
[Guest]: I think it's possible.
[Guest]: As I say, you know, pandemics cannot be eradicated, but pandemics can be curtailed.
[Guest]: And that is all that you can do.
[Guest]: I mean, there will be epidemic outbreaks in the future, but it's about how you respond
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: And I think first, obviously, trust science and trust what the scientists are saying.
[Guest]: But I think what this pandemic has shown that this classic recommendation of a lockdown,
[Guest]: while obviously very useful, you know, in a country like India has massive social costs
[Guest]: because the impact of a lockdown varies across different occupational groups.
[Guest]: Those who can't work from home, simply put, are simply, you know, getting poorer by the
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: And so hopefully some of these learnings, so having a good social security net for people
[Guest]: who are going to lose out, you know, in this place, like, for example, the migration crisis
[Guest]: was completely anticipable, at least for those who studied migration.
[Guest]: Hopefully when the next pandemic comes, we don't have a migration crisis.
[Guest]: I think that's the learning, you know, that can happen.
[Guest]: And that's what past pandemics tell you, that is, you know, you have to anticipate migration.
[Guest]: So you either ensure that there's enough social security given so that people are not thinking
[Guest]: of going back, or you allow them to go back first up and then do the lockdown, you know,
[Guest]: it's one of these two, but you can't do neither of them, as we saw earlier this year.
[Guest]: So there are lessons to take from this pandemic into the next, there are lessons to take from
[Guest]: past pandemics.
[Guest]: And as I said, the lesser we erase, the more likely or the less likely we are going to
[Guest]: deny when the next comes.
[Guest]: So these four stages of, you know, denial, confusion, acceptance and erasure.
[Guest]: And if we don't erase the memory, you know, then we are less likely to deny and we are
[Guest]: more likely to move on to that acceptance phase in a way of smart science, that is,
[Guest]: you look at the best technologies available to combat a pandemic, and then move on.
[Guest]: So clearly, I mean, I'm convinced that there's a role to kind of memorialize certain events,
[Guest]: especially in the medical community, which is the front runner to kind of contain a pandemic.
[Guest]: So you know, one of the things I'm getting from the medical community is that if only
[Guest]: they had known about this migrant world, for example, then some of the recommendations
[Guest]: would not, because the guys who recommended our government in March, who almost all doctors,
[Guest]: which is good, right, but nobody had really thought about migrants, right.
[Guest]: And this is a complete sort of blind spot, which seems to have been there.
[Guest]: So hopefully, I hope there are many books written on COVID and different angles of COVID.
[Guest]: I think we would, I think, learn a lot about nurses and doctors and how people actually
[Guest]: live, you know, especially the lives of frontline workers, which I think needs to be documented.
[Guest]: There should be awards for people doing great work.
[Guest]: You know, we've had 150,000 deaths due to COVID.
[Guest]: But in the past, mortuary workers, you know, when you think of millions of deaths, literally,
[Guest]: just imagine people burning these people or burning the bodies, so many people involved
[Guest]: in the pandemic, and we need to start recognizing the labor and value, you know, of that work.
[Guest]: So in the future, it's going to happen, but hopefully, we kind of sail through the next
[Amit Varma]: one comfortably.
[Amit Varma]: On these words of hope, I think we might as well sort of end the episode here.
[Amit Varma]: Chinmay, thanks so much for giving me so much of your time and giving so much of time to
[Amit Varma]: writing these wonderful books, both this one and India Moving, which I think are just remarkable
[Amit Varma]: books which anyone interested in India, or pandemics in the case of this latest one should
[Amit Varma]: certainly pick up.
[Guest]: Thanks, man.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.